---
src: https://michaelsugrue.substack.com/p/a-book-i-never-published
---

Chapter One:

 South Carolina College and the Politics of Slavery

…just where the master has effectively achieved lordship, he really finds  that
something has come about quite different from an independent  consciousness. It
is not an independent but rather a dependent  consciousness he has achieved.

\- Hegel, The Phenomenology of Geist

In 1856, one member of the South Carolina state legislature, whose  proposals
for the reform of primary and secondary school education had  been thwarted by a
voting bloc of alumni, stated bluntly:

The  College--the S.C. College--governs the state. Its Trustees are the
Governor--the Judges--the Chancellors --the president of the Senate--the Speaker
of the House--the Chairmen of certain Committees--distinguished and
ex-distinguished personages of the land. Legislators talk of the  College with
undisguised scorn for all other pretenders to the name of  College in the State,
and most of those out of it.

South Carolina College was uniquely important in the politics of nineteenth
century  South Carolina. The elite created by the College was implicated in many
of the anomalous characteristics of the states nineteenth century  political
history, which James Banner once called the “Problem of South  Carolina”.
Moreover, the influence of the College and its alumni was  felt throughout the
lower South. In a letter to a Columbia newspaper,  one antebellum writer
complained of the elitism of the alumni who looked "upon those educated at South
Carolina College as alone fit to fill the offices and control the destinies of
the state."

South Carolina  was the only state which never developed a two party system in
the  antebellum period. Often only one candidate ran and was elected without
opposition. James Banner has noted that “In the 144 congressional races  in the
state between 1824 and 1860, -78- or more than one half, offered  no contest to
the voters. Moreover, 128 or 71 percent of the 180  candidates whose party
affiliations are known during the same period  considered themselves Democrats.
Of the rest, only 18, or 10 percent,  were Whigs”  Current interpretations do
not adequately account for the  lack of an antebellum two party system.  James
Banner suggested that  there was “…a link between these out of phase party
systems and the two  great failures of American Federalism- Nullification and
secession- in  which South Carolina played the central role.”   Banner’s
conjecture can be extended: in fact South Carolina’s “out of phase” party system
was  linked to the three great failures of American federalism;  nullification,
secession and reconstruction. The College and its alumni  were intimately
involved with all of these crises. Many peculiar aspects of political
development in South Carolina before and after the Civil  War were determined by
the men, ideas and political influence of the  College. Part of the solution to
the “problem of South Carolina” is to  be found in South Carolina College.

​	In addition, during the  antebellum period South Carolina College
exerted a powerful influence on the newly admitted states bordering the Gulf:
Alabama, Mississippi,  Florida, Louisiana and Texas. At least one thousand,
perhaps as many as  fifteen hundred alumni left the state, and nearly all went
to the lower  South. In the process, these ministers, doctors, editors and
lawyers  contributed to the development of a new political elite in these new
plantation societies. College alumni served as antebellum Governors of  Georgia,
Florida, Alabama and Mississippi. More than a dozen alumni were sent to Congress
from Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and  Texas. When South Carolina
seceded in December 1860, Mississippi,  Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana,
and Texas joined the state in a  little more than a month. Alumni were in every
one of these secession  conventions. One of the forty-three signers of the
original Confederate  constitution was a former president of the College. Eight
of the  remaining forty-two signers were alumni.

​	Transplanted alumni  maintained close ties to South Carolina even if
they migrated to the  Gulf states. In 1833 James Dellett (’10) (later
Congressman Dellett) of  Alabama opposed Nullification, but could not bear to
coerce South  Carolina.  He wrote “Although I am satisfied in my own mind that
So  Carolina is wrong- yet I cannot forget that she nourished me in my  infancy
and taught lessons that I learned in my youth and early manhood. I am proud to
say I love her in the midst of her faults…” .  Contemporaries commented,
sometimes critically, upon the politicians of  the South Carolinian diaspora and
their connections to the radicalism of their home state. In 1860 when Governor
Madison Perry (’32) prepared to lead Florida out of the Union, one writer
described the Governor as “a  catspaw for South Carolina secessionists”.
Alumni of the College  represented four of the seven states that ratified the
original  Confederate Constitution.

​	More than three thousand young men  attended the College prior to the
Civil War and it would be hard to  overestimate the importance of the College
and its alumni on the  political culture of nineteenth century South Carolina.
South Carolina  College was a uniquely important institution in political life
and this  was often recognized by contemporaries. An early alumnus stated that
"the great merit of South Carolina College is that it tended to make the state
one people."   One observer noted, "The South Carolina College  has done more to
make us one homogeneous people than all other  influences combined."  The fact
that the College was the single most  important influence on the politics of
South Carolina's antebellum elite was well known. It was noted by a writer in
the Charleston Mercury,

​	If the College goes [say] farewell to the unity of sentiment which has
made South Carolina, small as she is, the center and rallying point of  states'
rights resistance; as Massachusetts has been, owing to the  influence of
Harvard, of the antagonistic principles of encroaching  federal power. It is the
educated intellect and the trained and  developed morale of the state which
gives it tone, character and  direction.

> Before the war, South Carolina College was one of the most important
> institutional sources of ultra Southern, proslavery, secessionist political
> thought. An alumnus stated that "from its commencement, the College has become
> to a large extent the center, not only of education, but of political thought
> in the state, and is doubtless the institution which has done the most to mold
> and influence the character of the people of the state."

> ​	The students of South Carolina College ranged in age from
> fourteen to twenty, and they were drawn almost exclusively from the families
> of the planting elite. These young men were given a hyperpoliticized education
> intended to create gentleman politicians. The College was an organic
> institution of higher learning which articulated and developed both an ethos
> and a political theory. The cult of honor greatly influenced the temperament
> of the College alumni which was manifested in their social and political
> behavior. The bluster and personal touchiness noted in many alumni was
> manifested throughout their political careers as well as in their political
> judgements. In 1860, of those members of South Carolina’s planter elite who
> had a college education, more had attended the College than all other
> institutions combined.  Most importantly, South Carolina's Secession
> Convention was composed of a full forty-four percent alumni.

South Carolina College helped keep alive a tradition of political discourse
which borrowed heavily from Federalism and the deferential “gentleman’s
politics” that it legitimized. Many themes stressed by South Carolina’s
Federalist elite, such as the pursuit of republican virtue by an  independent
squirearchy, the support for virtual as opposed to actual  representation, the
belief in natural aristocracy, the equation of  democracy with demagoguery, and
the abhorrence of factions and parties,  were kept alive on campus and in the
state house long after they became  extinct elsewhere.  South Carolina's planter
elite consciously  restricted access to higher education the sons of the elite,
and they  educated these planters’ sons in a locally developed political
tradition which was weighted toward quasi Federalist proslavery conservatism
which was gradually transformed into proslavery Southern nationalism.

The College alumni were men of fixed political principles. The College,  which
was created by Federalists and gentleman Jeffersonians in order to inhibit the
development of emancipating political influences, was very  successful in
legitimizing the atavistic political theory and practice  of the Palmetto State
throughout the nineteenth century. In 1857 the  Charleston Mercury virtually
admitted as much when it asserted that "Our state Constitution ... but for the
influence of the College would long  since have fallen before the attacks of
prejudice, demagogism and the  spirit of shallow, narrow, socialistic reform."
Another newspaper noted that by educating the sons of the elite at the College,
the state  successfully insulated the upcoming generation of politicians from
"foreign ideologies."

Although in later years some tried to deny that the College was "the hotbed of
disunion and the political parent  of those who were the great leaders of
anti-Union sentiment in the  state," such denials were more than a little
disingenuous.  From the  1820s on, a majority of the Trustees, faculty, alumni
and students were  closely connected with ultra-Southern politics. Looking back
on the  history of the College, some contemporaries were candid enough to admit
that the "education inculcated here had in the past been prejudiced,  narrow and
sectional, leading ... to the extreme states rights  doctrines, to
nullification, secession and disunion."

​	The  uniquely close connection between politics and higher education in
South Carolina was underscored by the fact that the College was located in  the
state capital, Columbia, just down the street from the state  legislature.
During the antebellum period, South Carolina College alumni were a dominant
force in the legislature. If the alumni and their  relations voted together as a
bloc, a majority could be found in most  legislative sessions, as some would be
reformers found out to their  dismay. South Carolina College alumni dominated
Federal officeholding as well: between 1830 and 1860, nearly half of South
Carolina's  Congressmen and Senators were made up of alumni. In the absence of
organized political parties, the alumni were the most cohesive network  of
influential political figures in the state.

​	The intersection of politics and education at Columbia South Carolina
was crucial to the development of South Carolina’s anomalous political life.
South  Carolina College was also crucial to the invention of the South as a
self conscious region with a distinct political, cultural and racial  identity.
A complex of ideas, institutions, and men, all connected to  the College in some
way, pervaded political life in nineteenth century  South Carolina and extended
into new Southern states as they entered the union.

​	In order to understand the functioning of the College in South
Carolina’s political life, it is necessary to understand the  social and
political context in which it originated. South Carolina  College had its
origins in the politics of the late 18th century, and in South Carolina, this
meant the politics of slavery. During the  Revolution and in the early national
period, the squirearchy of  lowcountry planters that surrounded Charleston met
political challenges  from the federal government, from their own slaves, and
from the  upcountry, which was thickly populated with yeoman farmers; the latter
resented the malapportionment and legal chicanery which allowed the  lowcountry
planters to dominate political life.  The gentlemen of the  lowcountry generally
shared a common experience in having fought for  American independence, owning
large amounts of property in land and  slaves, and holding a conservative,
elitist view of politics—all of  which helped make them comfortable with
Federalism. After the  “Revolution of 1800,” the most conspicuous way in which
lowcountry  Federalists assuaged the pain of their decline was by generating
support for the establishment of South Carolina College, which was intended to
create conservative, classically educated politicians.

The  American Revolution in South Carolina had been a conservative movement.
The men who made the greatest military and ideological contributions to  the
Revolution were large- scale slaveholders who had no theoretical or  practical
commitment to democracy or to the abolition of slavery. As the lowcountry
planters were the richest men on the continent, who had the  most to lose and
the least to gain from a disruption of the status quo,  they were an unlikely
group of rebels, and it is therefore not  surprising that one contemporary
politician, Rawlins Lowndes, noted that the makers of the Revolution in South
Carolina had “no love of  innovation.”  As David Ramsay, one of South Carolina’s
first historians, quipped about the Revolutionary War, “revolutions are rarely
patronized by any body of men who foresee that a diminution of their importance
is likely to result from the change.”  The same could be said of the  American
Civil War.

Slavery was the central political concern of  the lowcountry planters both
during the Revolutionary period and after,  because slavery was the foundation
of their wealth, social status, and  political power. Fear of slave revolt
helped prod South Carolina’s  lowcountry planters into joining the Revolutionary
cause in 1776, and it is certain that Lord Dunmore’s proclamation (offering
freedom to slaves of patriotic masters who helped the Crown) helped reinforce
their  commitment to independence.  At the end of the war, the lowcountry
planters were pained by the loss of more than five thousand slaves to  the
British during their evacuation, but they were cheered by the  prospect of
achieving an even more dominant position in the political  life of the state
which they had held in the political life of the  colony.

These hopes were frustrated by demands for an extension  of the franchise and
reapportionment made by the populous and newly  politicized upcountry.  The area
with the most wealth and the fewest  voters, the lowcountry, was greatly
over-represented in the legislature. Moreover, property requirements for voting
and officeholding excluded  many from political expression. In 1783, one
upcountry writer defiantly  described South Carolina as “a pure, simple
aristocracy of about 1,000  or 1,500 families. The rest of the citizens are
excluded from any share  or interference in the government.”  The residents of
the upcountry were no longer willing to submit to the domination of the opulent
lowcountry planters, and by 1786, according to one historian, the Palmetto state
was “close to a Shaysite Rebellion.”  Residents of the lowcountry were
particularly aware of the dangers of an uncontrolled sectionalism, and  this
helped solidify their support of the Constitution.

During  South Carolina’s debates on the ratification of the Constitution,
Charles Pinckney, who had been a member of the Constitutional Convention in
Philadelphia, made a shrewd observation about the composite nature  of
Republicanism: “We all know that the states have adhered in their  forms to the
republican principle, though they have differed widely in  their opinions of the
mode best calculated to preserve it.”  South  Carolina had a unique position
among the rebelling colonies because  almost half of the total population was
slaves, who were potentially the source of great danger as well as great wealth.
Not surprisingly, this  lowcountry slaveholding elite produced a variant of Whig
political  thought during the Revolutionary period that was “calculated to
preserve” the “republican principle” by emphasizing the Lockean natural  right
to property, and by extrapolation, the righteousness of slavery.

One of the few surviving pamphlets from revolutionary Charleston justified
slavery on the basis of natural law, expedience, and necessity.  South  Carolina
was the state that had far and away the greatest economic and  intellectual
commitment to slavery, and very few challenged the  prevailing orthodoxy.
Unlike Virginia, South Carolina never produced  any significant number of
politically influential abolitionists, a fact  well known to contemporaries.
Thomas Jefferson, for example, noted in  1786, “in Maryland and N. Carolina,
very few are disposed to emancipate, in South Carolina and Georgia, not the
smallest symptom.”  Conservative proslavery views were held by the lowcountry
gentry long before the end of the Revolutionary War, and these views,
inconsistent with those held by many of their comrades to the north, became
painfully evident when  South Carolina sent its delegation to the Constitutional
convention in  1787.

All four of South Carolina’s delegates to Philadelphia—John Rutledge, Charles
Pinckney, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, and Pierce  Butler—were opulent
lowcountry planters, steadfastly committed to  slavery. As one historian has
observed “Charleston and the surrounding  parishes were represented at
Philadelphia, not the entire state.”  South Carolina’s delegation attempted to
construct an “aristocratic  Republic,” a sort of South Carolina writ large which
represented wealth  as much as population. These South Carolinians were candid
about their  conservative, elitist, antimajoritarian sentiments.

The members  of the South Carolinian delegation appointed themselves the
guardian of  southern interests at Philadelphia, and they were vociferous in
their  demands. As Pierce Butler stated, “the security the Southern States want
is that their negroes may not be taken from them, which some gentlemen  within
or without doors, have a very good mind to do.”  This theme was  taken up by
Charles Cotesworth Pinckney who said, “property in slaves  should not be exposed
to danger under a Government instituted for the  protection of property.”  Some
of the northern delegates still demurred  at the prospect of protecting slavery
in the Constitution, but their  objections were dismissed by the realpolitik of
John Rutledge who  insisted that, when it came to slavery,

Religion and humanity had  nothing to do with this question—Interest alone is
the governing  principle with Nations—The true question at present is whether
the  Southern states shall or shall not be parts of the Union. If the  Northern
states consult their interest, they will not oppose the  increase of Slaves
which will increase the commodities of which they  will become carriers.

Charles Pinckney made a long, detailed  speech in defense of slavery, which
anticipated many of the claims made  by antebellum proslavery propaganda.
Pinckney began his speech by  insisting that “If slavery be wrong, it is
justified by the example of  all the world.”  He cited the sanction given to
slavery by ancient and  modern states, pointing out that “in all ages one half
of mankind had  been slaves,” and then argued for the economic and political
necessity  of slavery.  The South Carolinians were dogged in their pursuit of
southern interests, and they wrung from a reluctant majority an array of
concessions such as the three-fifths compromise, a fugitive slave law,  and the
protection of the international slave trade until 1808, which  they hoped would
satisfy their native state.  Other states, such as  Virginia, were less unified
in their views on slavery and showed less  intransigence.  Rutledge and the
other South Carolinian Federalists  could not have brought an antislavery
document home, and they explicitly said so at Philadelphia.

When the proposed document was  examined back in South Carolina, some members of
the ratification  convention voiced anxieties about the possibility of federal
interference with slavery. Charles Cotesworth Pinckney’s response was
noteworthy. He insisted that the document he helped construct was as  stalwart a
defender of slavery as he was.  The Constitution, according  to Pinckney, made
slavery more rather than less secure. He argued that

We have a security that the general government can never emancipate them,  for
no such authority is granted, and it is admitted on all hands that  the General
Government has no powers but what are expressly granted by  the Constitution;
and that all rights not expressed were reserved for  the several states. We have
obtained a right to recover our slaves in  what ever part of America they may
take refuge, which is a right we had  not before.

The Founding Fathers created out of a mass of  conflicting interests an
ambiguous compromise that allowed for  interpretations which could be tailored
to the constituencies in the  various states.  In Pennsylvania and Massachusetts
the same document was touted as being antislavery. This was useful in getting
the  Constitution ratified, although embarrassing in the nineteenth century
when contradictory representations turned out to have been made on  behalf of
the same agreement. The Constitution which the South  Carolinians were persuaded
to ratify guaranteed states rights and  insured slavery.

The strict construction of the Constitution was  taken for granted, and the
limited powers delegated to the Federal  government make slavery inviolable.
Because the Constitution ratified in South Carolina was understood thus, in
1790, during the first Congress, South Carolina’s representatives were incensed
by what they regarded as bad faith in the petitions made by Quaker
abolitionists.  South  Carolinian Federalist Thomas Tucker stated the position
of the  lowcountry gentry in prophetic terms: “Do these men expect a general
emancipation of slaves by law? This would never be submitted to by the  Southern
States without a civil war.”

William Smith, Federalist  congressman, later Senator, from South Carolina,
attacked the  abolitionists who had submitted petitions against slavery, saying
“When  we entered into this confederacy, we did it from political, not moral
motives, and I do not think my constituents want to learn morals from  the
petitioners; I do not believe they want improvement in their moral  system; if
they do, they can get it at home.”  A month later, Smith  produced on the floor
of the House an elaborate apologia for slavery  which borrowed heavily from
Pinckney’s speech during the Constitutional  Convention.  Slavery, Smith
insisted, was a legal and moral institution  sanctioned by the Bible and the
Constitution, morality and expediency.  Many of those who constructed the
Constitution opposed slavery, but none of those who heard his speech could evade
or contradict Smith when he  made the historically accurate claim that the
Constitution had  compromised the issue. “We took each other with our mutual bad
habits  and respective evils, for better, for worse; the Northern states adopted
us with our slaves, and we adopted them with their Quakers.”

South Carolinian politicians of the 1790s could hardly avoid a strong
proslavery stance since they and most of their constituents were  dependent upon
slaveholding. As one historian noted, “a slaveowning  culture… preceded (and to
a certain extent made necessary) public  expressions of a sectional political
philosophy rooted in the defense of slavery. … a proslavery orthodoxy was
emerging…that historians have  mistakenly associated exclusively with the late
antebellum period.”  A  rejoinder to the abolition petitions sent to Congress by
the Quakers, a  petition was drawn up in 1792 by the inhabitants of St. Luke’s
parish, a lowcountry area primarily made up of large rice plantations. It stated
that while some abolitionists seemed to be merely misguided in their  charity,
others, more radical and malignant,

are assiduously  instilling sentiments of a desperate nature into the minds of
slaves we  can have no doubt; for a desire that possessors of slaves should
suffer  from them has been openly avowed and we think in an unfeeling manner.
Such sentiments and declarations we humbly conceive are subversive of  the
harmony which ought to subsist between the citizens of these United  States;
repugnant to the solemn compact of government we entered into on September 17,
1787.

The wealthy slaveholders of the lowcountry  had good reason to fear the rise of
abolitionism in Congress, but in the early 1790s at least; the practical danger
to slavery was still remote. The threat to slavery posed by the revolution in
Santo Domingo was more immediately dangerous. When the revolution in Haiti first
broke out,  the streams of refugees that poured into Charleston were so large
that  the state’s resources were taxed to the limit providing for them.  As  one
traveler in 1796 noted, “Charleston is full of Frenchmen from Santo  Domingo.”
Many of these refugees managed to bring some of their slaves  with them, and
virtually all brought stories of slave revolt that  horrified the
Charlestonians.  In 1797 a slave conspiracy was discovered in Charleston.  Two
slaves were executed and a backlash ensued in which not just slaves but anything
French or connected with the French  Revolution was viewed with extreme
suspicion.

During the late  1790s the close connection between the Jeffersonian Republicans
and  French political thought, usually labeled “Jacobinism,” was an albatross
which Federalists gladly hung on even the least revolutionary  Jeffersonian
necks.  Among the objections against Jefferson aired by a  pamphleteer during
the election of 1800 was that “He is a Philosophe in  the modern French sense of
the word. In that character he entertains  opinions unfriendly to the property,
which forms the efficient labor of a great part of the southern states.” Thus,
Jefferson should not be  elected because he merely “would be the head of a
party, not of a  nation.”

The fear of massive slave revolt, while terrifying to  the lowcountry, was
evanescent, and as the danger became less acute, a  more permanent threat to
lowcountry hegemony became manifest.  South  Carolina’s upcountry population had
increased enormously in the years  after the Revolutionary war. The inhabitants
of the upcountry had been  largely loyalist during the war, and during the
debates on the  ratification of the Constitution the most vociferous
antifederalists  were elected from the upcountry districts.  In the eighties and
nineties, Jeffersonian political thinking, with its emphasis on localism and
Herrnvolk equality, and its idealization of the georgic virtue  embodied in
independent yeoman, became increasingly popular in upcountry districts.

Ralph Izard, a lowcountry Federalist who was sent to Washington as the first
Senator from South Carolina complained directly to Jefferson himself. “Our
governments tend too much to Democracy,” he  wrote, “a handicraftsman thinks an
apprenticeship necessary to make him  acquainted with his business. But our
backcountrymen are of opinion that a politician may be born as well as a poet.”
The burgeoning upcountry  population adopted what lowcountry Federalists
perceived as dangerously  democratic Jeffersonian rhetoric, and they found this
rhetoric  particularly trying when it was so broadly stated that it could be
construed as endangering slavery.

Henry William DeSaussure, a  Federalist who was later most influential in the
founding of South  Carolina College, was frequently a writer on political
issues. In a 1797 pamphlet opposing the reapportionment demanded by the
upcountry, he  inveighed against the egalitarian implications of
Jeffersonianism:

It is said that equality is the natural condition of man, yet such is the  state
of society in South Carolina that this principle, which is the  foundation of
all the others, was adopted and reduced to practice, it  would instantly free
the unfortunate slaves, who form two-fifths of the  whole people, and are the
only cultivators of the soil in the  lowcountry. This principle in its
application would be nearly as  destructive to the upper country, since,
independently of the loss of  its market, its title to its own slaves would be
destroyed... The awful  catastrophe of the French West-India Islands now
desolated by fire and  sword should caution Carolina of a too ready adoption of
the general  principles or axioms of these theorists.

Not only were the  political views of Jefferson’s followers suspect, some of the
less  guarded comments about property and equality made by Jefferson himself
made South Carolina’s Federalist gentry nervous.  So many expressed  qualms
about Jefferson’s commitment to slavery that his supporters had  to spill a
substantial amount of ink insisting that he was not “soft” on slavery.  Even
then, many Federalists, like signer of the Constitution  John Rutledge,
preferred the New Yorker, Aaron Burr, in the deadlock of  1800.  Lowcountry
Federalists were ardent advocates of the Constitution  because it reinforced
slavery, and they dominated federal and state  office holding in the 1790s.  As
one historian noted, “membership lists  in the Federalist Party read like a
directory of prominent lowcountry  families of the Revolutionary era.”  As the
power of the lowcountry  Federalists waned during the late 1790s, and it became
clear that the  Jeffersonians would eventually wrest control of the legislature,
the  Federalists began a series of defensive political maneuvers designed to
minimize the danger of the ascendant Jeffersonians. Federalist  patricians
successfully adopted the strategy of making Jeffersonianism  innocuous by
establishing safeguards which would secure their property,  ensure their social
status, and conserve certain elements of their  political ideals.

In 1800, when the new legislature elected a  Jeffersonian Governor and Senator,
all of South Carolina’s electoral  votes were cast against the Federalist Adams
and for Jefferson. South  Carolina was the swing state in the election, and
Federalist control  over South Carolinian politics had been decisively
challenged. After  Jefferson’s election, Federalism was eclipsed but not
extinguished, and  both sides prudently sought a modus vivendi. In the wake of
defeat, one  especially prescient Federalist predicted that the victors could
not  survive without adopting “Federalist principles,” and his prediction  was,
to a surprising extent, accurate.

Their opposers, in the  triumph of momentary success, have proclaimed that “the
sun of  federalism has set forever.” This is a mistake.... The mists of
democracy may obscure it for a moment [but] it will return.... Names may change;
the men who hold the reins may be different; the denominations  of parties may
be altered or forgotten; but the principles on which the  federalists acted must
be adopted....”

The election of 1800 was a watershed in South Carolinian politics because it was
the first time  that the malapportionment of the legislature, which favored the
lowcountry, did not suffice to elect a majority of Federalists. “In the  very
important session of 1800 the fifty-one Federalist members of the  house
represented 24,000 whites, while the sixty-five Republicans  represented
166,000.”  Ezekiel Pickens wrote privately to his son Andrew in December of 1800
that “Jack Drayton is elected Governor, as nobody  of consequence would offer.
The upper country carries everything they  wish which chagrins many of our
nabobs here.”  The Federalists attempted to cushion their fall by establishing a
modus vivendi with the  Jeffersonians, in particular with the wealthier, more
conservative  Jeffersonians like the new Governor, John Drayton. In the
aftermath of  the election, one Jeffersonian reported that “the Federal interest
in  this state I believe have completely struck their colors... and I expect
[they] will agree to a compromise, upon a moderate scale, short of  putting them
completely in our power, which the moderate part of us have no idea of.”

Drayton and other prominent members of his party  were as interested in reaching
an accord as the Federalists, because it  would be easier to govern if political
conflicts with the state’s most  influential men were mollified, because
lowcountry Jeffersonians had a  considerable overlap of interest with lowcountry
Federalists, and  because they shared with the Federalists a disapproval of
factions and  parties that was a commonplace of eighteenth-century political
thought.   Making Jeffersonian Democracy safe for South Carolina was the main
theme of Drayton’s term as Governor. Appalled by the excesses of the  French
Revolution, the price of acquiescence by the Federalist elite was the explicit
repudiation of any links between Jeffersonianism and  fundamental social change.
This was easier to promise in the South than  in the North.

Jeffersonianism was the ideological precipitate of a regional elite who were
especially interested in social progress that  undermined the socio-economic
status and political power of their main  regional rival, northern Federalists.
By articulating the grievances of  those whites at the bottom of the social
scale and demanding white  manhood suffrage, Jeffersonianism threatened radical
social  transformation of the North. Jeffersonian Democracy was more of a threat
to northern Federalists than to southern, because in the South, the  existence
of a huge black underclass made possible the continuance of  patrician status
despite the democratizing character of Jeffersonian  reforms.

Despite the fact that prominent politicians from both  parties worked diligently
to eliminate as much political conflict as  possible, the person most
responsible for harmonizing South Carolina’s  political discord was neither a
South Carolinian nor a politician. The  introduction of Eli Whitney’s cotton gin
in the late 1790s created for  the first time a basis for the extension of
lucrative plantation  agriculture above the fall line. This change in the
agricultural economy allowed for an extension of the Black Belt into the
midlands of the  state which helped generate a certain community of interest
between the  leading men of the upper and lower parts of the state that had not
been  present before.   The expansion of cotton plantations into the upcountry
increased the demand for slaves, and it was upcountry planters, mainly
Jeffersonians, who pushed through the reopening of the slave trade in  1803.
The lowcountry Federalists were alarmed at the increasing number  of slaves in
the population, because they feared a drop in the price of  slaves and the
threat of slave revolt. However they were to some extent  compensated by the
knowledge that with the spread of slaveholding and  plantations to the
upcountry, a major source of conflict had been  eliminated, and an economic
foundation for political accommodation had  been laid.

Governor Drayton was an astute politician, and he had  support from the
upcountry districts because he was understood to be  friendly towards the idea
of legislative reapportionment. He also  understood that in order to gain
legitimacy in the eyes of the defeated  Federalists, he would have to show that
his variant of Jeffersonianism  was “virtuous” in the sense of promoting the
“public” good. He needed to show himself to be above parties and factions,
friendly to the  hierarchical social structure that already existed in the
state, and  most importantly a firm defender of property rights, particularly
slavery. Drayton was the first politician in American history to achieve
notoriety for producing proslavery propaganda while a sitting Governor.  Drayton
was also a leading figure in the establishment of South  Carolina College, an
event which had enormous influence on the  subsequent development of South
Carolinian politics in particular and  Southern politics in general.

Shortly after being elected, Drayton set to work writing A View of South
Carolina, a book ostensibly  designed to inform European audiences about the
land and people of the  state, but which also admirably served the function of
reassuring  Federalist rice barons that Jeffersonians were “safe” on slavery.
Drayton argued that the Constitution granted slaveowners secure property rights
in slaves, and that the abolition petitions sent to Congress  were produced by
nefarious sectional enthusiasts who struck a pose of  humanitarian
disinterestedness. While he admitted that the slave trade  was odious, he
insisted that the slaves were better off in South  Carolina than in Africa, that
they were naturally suited to work in the  lowcountry swamps, that laws insured
their good treatment, and that  these facts “sufficiently justify the present
condition of this state,  in the kind of property to which we immediately
refer.”

The most  important step Drayton took in gaining the confidence and respect of
the Federalists was the establishment of South Carolina College in 1801.
Drayton sent a message to the legislature soon after his election in  which he
recommended the establishment of a College near the state  capitol at Columbia.
Although it would be expensive to subsidize a  College from state funds, Drayton
believed that the cost was worthwhile  because “The friendship of our young men
would thence be promoted, and  our political union be much advanced thereby.”
The legislature acted  promptly, and the bill establishing the College was
shepherded through  the lower house by Federalist Henry William DeSaussure, who
wrote that  they had “founded a College at Columbia where the youth of all the
parts of the state may be educated, and a greater union of opinion be  produced
in our state.”  In the upper house a number of prominent  Federalists, including
Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, who had been John  Adams’ running mate in the
election of 1800, aided the passage of the  bill. The bill passed with scant
opposition in less than a month. The  development of cotton plantations outside
the lowcountry at the end of  the eighteenth century and the rapprochement
between Federalists and  Jeffersonians connected the interests of lowcountry
rice and cotton  planters in the middle of the state. This commonality of
interest made  possible the establishment of South Carolina College.

The only  recorded objections to the College were made the next year by
inhabitants of upcountry Union County, who sent two petitions asking for the
repeal of the act.  Even though “many inhabitants” of a state that  did not have
a public school system objected to subsidizing a college  that they would never
use, these petitions were ignored by gentlemen of  both parties.  With the
exception of the Reconstruction era, until the  election of Ben Tillman in 1890,
the gentlemen who dominated the state  legislature annually funded South
Carolina College generously from the  public treasury, despite very reasonable
complaints made by upcountry  yeomen who often were not taught to read English,
much less Latin and  Greek. Even though most of the state’s yeomen farmers could
vote, in  1800 as in 1860, they were limited to a choice of gentlemen as their
representatives.  The gentlemen were sufficiently powerful to keep the  property
qualification for lower house membership the highest in the  United States.
Property requirements for the upper house and the  governorship were even
greater.  Consequently, as one historian has  noted “the legislature was
composed of patricians, Federalist or  Republican.”

South Carolina’s patricians understood the  political import of the College very
clearly, and they were not about to let the parsimony of upcountry yeomen
interfere with their plans. The  founding of South Carolina College in 1801 was
an attempt to smooth over the partisan and sectional differences among South
Carolina’s elite as a means to prevent the erosion of the gentry’s dominant
position in  society. The College was intended to produce a homogeneous moral
and  intellectual cadre which would be peculiarly fitted to the virtuous
exercise of political power on account of their independent and  enlightened
public spiritedness. South Carolina’s organic institution of higher learning was
to be a bulwark of conservatism, a place where  young gentlemen could be
instructed in old verities. The College was to  be a haven for conservative
ideas, a homogenizing force which could  create the sort of unanimity of
“public” opinion which was necessary to  prevent the emergence of “factions” and
the concomitant loss of public  virtue and personal honor.

The College institutionalized the  transmission of the conservative, proslavery
"gentleman's politics"  favored by both Republican and Federalist legislators of
the late  eighteenth century. The Palmetto state kept the antiparty doctrines of
the Federalist era well into the nineteenth century. These Federalist  holdovers
served the interests of the planting elite and of those  gentlemen lawyers who
dominated the state legislature and thus the state government. The College
alumni were the largest network of politically  influential men in the state.
The anti-party ideology, so conspicuous in South Carolina, was not passive
atavism produced by some ideological  inertia peculiar to the Palmetto state.
Rather, antebellum South  Carolinian politicians adhered to the anti-party
doctrines of the  eighteenth century for the same reasons the Federalists did:
it served  their interests by keeping the ruling elite cohesive and the
opposition  fragmented. Of necessity, South Carolina developed various
functional  substitutes for political parties. The network of College alumni
helped  organize the legislature by controlling the speakership and thus
committee assignments. The remarkably tenacious custom of dueling was
particularly important in South Carolina because it advertised a  gentleman’s
political availability, and it marked him as a legitimate  bearer of political
power.  In the absence of political parties, dueling functioned as a ritual of
self-selection which validated a man’s claim  to the status of honorable
gentleman, a sine qua non for political  power. Significantly, dueling often
troubled South Carolina College, and the faculty and many of the alumni were
both duelists and politicians.  The mores and etiquette of South Carolina’s
political elite was an  unannounced part of the College curriculum.

Henry William  DeSaussure, the legislator most intimately connected with
founding the  College, explained the bill to a friend by saying, “We of the
lower  country well knew that the power of the State was thenceforward to be in
the upper country, and we desired our future rulers to be educated  men.”
DeSaussure, a prominent Charleston lawyer and a leading  Federalist, articulated
concerns shared by many influential lowcountry  gentlemen after the election of
1800. Chancellor Harper, in his memoir  of DeSaussure, related that

This measure originated in the  contest which had arisen between the upper and
lower country of the  state, with respect to representation in the legislature.
The upper  country, which at the adoption of the constitution of 1790 was
comparatively poor and unpeopled, had allotted to it, a much smaller
representation. It had now grown in wealth, far outnumbered the lower  country
in population, and imperatively demanded a reform in the  representation. This
the people of the lower country feared to grant, on the ground of general
deficiency of intelligence and education in the  upper country, which would
render it incompetent to exercise wisely and  justly the power which such a
reform would place in their hands. It was  to remedy this deficiency that it was
proposed to establish a College at Columbia. The act was passed, not without
difficulty, nor without the  strenuous opposition of many who it was more
especially intended to  benefit.

South Carolina College was a last gesture made by the  wealthiest men of South
Carolina’s revolutionary generation toward  preserving their political ideals
and elite status. The bill  establishing the College was described revealingly
in 1854, by an  alumnus whose speech and thought were anachronistically
saturated with  an antique Federalism.

It was in the year 1801 that the initiative was taken in the first legislative
act for founding this College. The  period coinciding with a transfer of civil
power—with a revolution that  changed the relations of the parties which then
divided—perhaps to some  small degree may still divide the opinions of men—if
not in this, at  least in other States. It was in a house of Assembly, where the
victorious party held yet only a divided rule; and their adversaries,  though
vanquished, still kept the field; that this great measure  originated. It came
as the last will and testament of the expiring  party; and sounded like the
proclamation of the conquerors announcing  the terms granted in the hour of
victory. It is fortunate indeed to find hostile parties agreeing in a great
principle. Indeed it is a proud  reflection that whatever may be the
extravagance or madness of party,  opposition to learning is no instrument of
popularity in America.

​	A late eighteenth century political ideal was approximately realized in
mid nineteenth century South Carolina: the Federalist vision of an  independent,
propertied, educated gentry leading a political community  with a consensus
about the ends of public policy if not the means. The  founders were more
successful than they could have reasonably expected  in their attempt to create
what one president of the College, James  Henly Thornwell (‘31), later described
as “something stable in the midst of change.”   The College did in fact become a
conservative, unifying  force in South Carolina’s political life, and this point
was recognized  by many observers. “It has effaced sectional lines of state
division  that threatened once to become permanent and it has molded and shaped
the whole population of the state into a spirit of unity and concord,  rarely
exemplified elsewhere,” as one newspaper noted approvingly.   Thornwell, who saw
this conservative influence as the College’s raison  d’être, said “those who are
meditating an invasion upon the existing  arrangements of the state, feel the
necessity of first removing the  great mediator and reconciler in this
institution. While the College  stands there is a perpetual pledge of peace and
the preservation of the  established order.”

​	The “established order” was shattered by a  Civil War that the College
alumni worked tirelessly to create. They  attempted to realize their political
ideals in a Southern nation and in  the debris that remained after 1865 they
attempted to revive their  vision of society and government during “redemption”.
After the Civil  War, in South Carolina enough of the old elite survived to
resist de  facto the emancipation of their slaves, despite the fact that slavery
had been abolished de jure. During reconstruction the alumni of the  College
were tireless in their attempt to conserve as much as they could of the ancien
regime. When reconstruction ended, the alumni were  conspicuous in “redeeming”
the state. In 1876, at the end of  Reconstruction, the new governor, many
members of the state legislature  as well as most of the congressional
delegation were College alumni. The next year, Republican state judges were
replaced by Bourbon judges,  which also included many alumni. The Bourbon
resistance to  Reconstruction led by alumni ultimately triumphed: proslavery
doctrine  was transformed into white supremacy, and southern nationalism was
transformed into home rule. The defeat of Reconstruction after 1876  proved that
terror, not cotton was king.

​	One historian has  noted that “The Old South was in some sense created
as a mental  construct only a short time before it was eliminated as a material
construct.”

The alumni of South Carolina College were involved  both in the creation of the
South as a mental construct and the  destruction of the South in a catastrophic
Civil War. Both before and  after the war, the alumni of South Carolina College
constituted a  privileged intellectual elite who had all of the advantages of
wealth  and education that the South could offer. They spoke a common political
idiom and they shared a consensus about the ends of public policy if not the
means. They were thus aptly suited to leading the race specific  ochlochracy
which resisted Reconstruction.

​	The political  dominance of the Collegiate elite, which collapsed toward
the end of the century. In 1890, when the ostentatiously plebian “Pitchfork” Ben
Tillman was elected Governor, he successfully opposed the College and  the elite
it fostered. He did what a Civil War failed to do; permanently overthrow South
Carolina’s ancien regime. Tillman claimed that his  campaign arrayed
“Jefferson’s dogmas against aristocracy”, and he was  right, but three
generations late.  Tillman’s triumph signaled a change  in political leadership
and tone, but important intellectual and legal  legacies of the Collegiate elite
continued well into the twentieth  century.
