---
src: https://michaelsugrue.substack.com/p/a-book-i-never-published-c87
---

Chapter Three:

 Temperament and Indoctrination: “Thymos” in Students and Alumni

…it is a matter of no small importance what sort of habits we form from the
earliest age- it makes a vast difference, or rather all the difference  in the
world.

-Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics

​	Every theory  of education of education entails a theory of human
nature; the  practical results of any education illustrate the inadequacies of
whatever theory it entails. Planter’s sons in antebellum South Carolina  were
exposed to formative influences that produced a hypertrophy of what the Greeks
called “thymos” which is usually translated “spiritedness”.  A telling example
will be found in Wade Hampton III (‘36), who as a  child was frightened by a
large drake that lived on his family’s main  plantation, “Millwood”. On a trip
to the store in Columbia he asked for  and received as a gift a small sword. The
Hamptons were a military  family; this was not a rubber toy but a piece of sharp
steel scaled down to accommodate a hand too small yet to have held a pencil. On
returning home, five year old Wade, now armed, had an “affair of honor” with the
aggressive bird:

Another plucky, telling whack with the sword, and another. The duck ran. The boy
was the pursuer. Little Wade rained  slashes upon his ancient foe’s head, neck
and body. The webfooted bully  was baffled, bruised, injured. He thought of
escape, too late. The son  and grandson of soldiers had not armed himself for
any indecisive  action. Grimly, the child closed in, heading the big bird off
from the  pond, tirelessly and vengefully hewing away. He did not cease until
the  drake lay dying at his feet. His elders had the good taste and
understanding to congratulate him, saying things about a chip off the  old
block.

Wade Hampton’s upbringing was not calculated to  produce Mother Teresa. The
milieu into which Hampton was born had the  “good taste and understanding” to
approve of his swordplay as the five  year old “grimly” closed for the kill
because this indicated an  honorable temperament. At secession, Hampton (’36),
reputedly the  richest man in the South with 3,000 slaves and massive
landholdings,  organized his own regiment, Hampton’s Legion, into which he
welcomed  many alumni. General Hampton, a heroic fighter wounded five times
during the Civil War, (three times at Gettysburg alone), was, predictably
enough, very proficient with a cavalry saber.

The similarity of  political behavior and commitment found among the students
and alumni of South Carolina  College was overdetermined by the education they
received there. This is not to suggest that these men lacked freedom,  agency or
moral responsibility: it is simply to note that on a November  afternoon in
1861, all of these free, morally responsible agents all  chose to do the same
thing in the same way at the same time. Most  students from Harvard opposed
slavery and joined the Union army,  realizing their freedom by exercising their
agency in the opposite way,  and for similar reasons. There are degrees of
responsibility and  freedom. Education provides the contours of ordinary moral
deliberation. After all, if education does not influence the later thought and
action of those who are exposed to it, then education is a waste of time and
professors should get honest work. Examining the commonalities of the  student’s
upbringing and education clarifies the antecedent conditions  which shaped the
choices these men made without threatening the  metaphysics of historical
writing.

Looking back on his student days, Dr. Marion Sims, (‘32) recalled:

We are what we are by education, and hardly any man is responsible for his
opinions or in his youth for his acts. When I was a boy in college, I  was so
imbued with the correctness of dueling that I am sure that if I  had been
challenged, or thought I had any occasion, I would not have  hesitated to put my
life in jeopardy in defense of a principle of  honor.”

Honor was the bridge between the politics and ethics of  South Carolina’s elite.
Loss of republican virtue in the public sphere  entailed a loss of personal
honor. The unanimous action of the  undergraduates in taking up arms against the
North paralleled the near  unanimity of the alumni (often students' fathers,
uncles, elder  brothers) in supporting the South in its bid for independence
from the  North. The influence of the College in connecting the student’s
notions  of honor and their political views was overwhelmingly strong. Alumni
who accepted the duties of political leadership were quick to resent  calumny
and dishonesty toward themselves or their state; they  simultaneously accepted
what they understood to be moral leadership as  well. Using the language of
honor and the imagery of the duel the most  influential of these men helped turn
sectionalism into Civil War.

​	South Carolina College created an intellectual vanguard was which to
serve the political interests of the state, which were understood to be
congruent with the interests of a Southern nation which they helped to  create.
The doctrines which South Carolina College articulated and the  extracurricular
activities that were prohibited but tolerated imposed  upon the specific stratum
of society a matrix of educational influences  designed to produce not just
ideas but also a certain kind of  temperament and character. At their best
alumni of the College were  independent, courageous, eloquent, honest and
intelligent; at their  worst they were vain, arrogant, self indulgent, and
violent. “Thymos” ,  “spiritedness”, was characteristically superabundant..

​	The  College curriculum was completely prescribed. There were no
electives.  The curriculum borrowed from the conservative institutions of New
England an emphasis on classical languages and a disdain for utilitarian
practicality.  Freshmen studied Xenophon and the New Testament in  Greek, Virgil
and Cicero in Latin. In addition, they were required to  study "Roman
Antiquities" (ancient history), English grammar,  arithmetic, and Sheridan's
"Lectures on Elocution." Sophomores  progressed to Homer, Horace, geography,
logic, mathematics, and French.  Juniors studied Longinus, Cicero, geometry,
astronomy, French, "natural  and moral philosophy," and "elements of criticism."
Seniors completed  their studies with mathematics, Demosthenes, Locke, Millot's
"Elements  of History" and a review of the previous year's work.  The classical
curriculum was peculiar in that it was very skewed in favor of epic  poetry,
ancient history and political rhetoric, a mix that was thought  educationally
defective even in ancient times.  Drama was initially  ignored, although
eventually Aristophanes and the tragedians were  introduced. Plato and Aristotle
were almost completely omitted, with a  few selections added to the curriculum
just before the war.

​	  French was taught sporadically during Maxcy's administration, but
after  tutor Nicholas Herbemont resigned in 1817, it was dropped from the
curriculum altogether. Although a few students studied French on their  own,
after 1817, no living languages were required at the College. This  had the
pernicious effect, then as now, of restricting the spectrum of  thought and
discussion on campus and artificially insulating them from  new ideas.
Simultaneously, the college gradually increased the  requirements for classical
languages. President Thornwell introduced  written examinations and
substantially increased academic standards. He  was particularly concerned with
increasing the Greek and Latin  requirements. Under his direction, the classical
language requirements  at South Carolina were increased to the point where they
exceeded the  classical requirements of all other colleges in America.  He wrote
to  the Trustees, "The College must fail to do its work, unless it brings  the
teachers and the state to feel that classics and philosophy are the  very
essence of education itself and that Latin and Greek are not for  the College
but the College for Latin and Greek."

​	A Union  officer commented on the mental habits of the men composing the
South  Carolinian elite he encountered during Reconstruction:

One of the  mistakes of the “chivalrous Southron” was to suppose that he was a
great reader, and abreast of his age in science and literature. The truth is
that while his reading was mainly good, it was venerable; he had the
conservative taste for what had been considered improving and  interesting by
his grandfather; his shelves were loaded with the worthy  though possibly heavy
old “books which no gentleman’s library should be  without.”; he was fairly sure
to own Hume, Robertson, Gibbon, Addison,  Johnson, Goldsmith etc. In theology he
was strenuously orthodox, holding fast to the English fathers in Biblical
exegesis and distrusting all  Germans without knowing anything about them. In
science he was averse to admitting novelties, unless they went to show that the
Negro was not a  human being, and so not entitled to the benefit of the
Declaration of  Independence.

South Carolina College was the institutional matrix in which these backward
looking tastes were formed.

​	Theology is conspicuous by its absence in the original curriculum,
although daily attendance at chapel was required.  Perhaps this was an  attempt
to avoid denominational infighting, perhaps theology was simply  thought
superfluous to the upbringing of young gentlemen.  William  Grayson, the
pro-slavery controversialist who later wrote a long poem  called the "Hireling
and the Slave," was a graduate of the class of  1809. Writing of South
Carolinian mores during the time he was growing  up, he noted that "Religion was
very little regarded. Church going was  for the most confined to the women. They
were always better behaved than the lords [sic]. Sunday was a day of boat
racing, foot racing, drinking and fighting."

​	It may also have been the case that the  Trustees distrusted the
political implications of some religious  teachings, particularly those of the
evangelical Protestant sects which  were so popular among upcountrymen. As
Charles Pinckney noted in 1807,  "... 'tis vain to conceal from ourselves the
fact that there are spread  everywhere through the state religious and other
enthusiasts who are  preaching very dangerous doctrines and inciting in our
black population  sentiments that must lead to fatal results...."  Whatever the
reasons  for the omission of theology in the original curriculum of the College,
it was not until 1813 that Butler's Analogy and Paley's Evidences of the
Christian Religion" were required, and then only of the upperclassmen.

​	The Trustees wished to have President Cooper teach  metaphysics but he
objected strenuously. He was a secular, utilitarian,  practical man, and the
spinning of conceptual spiderwebs was not at all  to his taste. He wrote to the
Trustees: "The president professes himself qualified and competent to teach
metaphysics; (having devoted much more time to that unsatisfactory subject than
most men; so much so as to be  fully persuaded it is not worth the time required
to be bestowed upon  it)."  Although willing to teach metaphysics if required,
Cooper  recommended that the Trustees allow him to innovate by giving a series
of lectures on political economy instead. The Trustees agreed, and  Cooper's
course in political economy was the first and for a while the  only one of its
kind in America. Like Marx, Cooper's movement from  metaphysics to political
economy was fraught with political consequences which would only become manifest
later.

​	During the Cooper era  examinations were oral. Besides listening to
lectures, the work which  the students did in class was the recitation of
assigned readings and  notes taken on previous lectures. Three sets of student
notebooks exist  for the period 1831 to 1834.  Only notes for Professor Henry's
class in  metaphysics survive in duplicate. Professor Henry lectured on moral
philosophy, and it seems that he taught class after class of students  the same
unchanging standards of right and wrong. All of the students  notebooks read
like catechisms. The lecture notes took the form of  either definitions followed
by elaborations or questions and answers.  When the textbook was right, as was
the case when he wrote that  gentlemen ought not to lie, Henry iterated the
text. When the text was  wrong, as when it called slavery a moral evil, Henry
gave the students  the right answer, which was "it is absolutely necessary to
keep the  blacks in their present condition."  Besides giving the students an
introduction to proslavery apologetics that dove-tailed nicely with  Cooper's
lectures in political economy, Professor Henry's course in  moral philosophy
also gave the students an elaborate explication of "the laws of honor," a topic
of great importance to these young gentlemen.

​	Politics was considered to be a part of the subject matter of moral
philosophy, and Professor Henry helpfully formulated the substance of  four of
his lectures on the Constitution into questions and answers for  easy
memorization. These notes are indeed memorable.

Q: Can any state be called disloyal which will submit to the decision of a
convention, but not to the usurped power of Congress?

​	A: No, rather the friend of the Union....

​	Q: What would you say of acts passed by Congress which transcend its
powers?

​	A: They are null and void....

​	Q: What is necessary in order to be relieved of  oppression?

​	A: Unanimity of the oppressed....

​	Q: What effects on the Union has the known right of secession?

​	A: It strengthens rather than injures it.

Q: What was the fault of England with regard to her conduct towards us when
colonies?

A: She confided too much in her own strength and in the supposed ease with which
she could intimidate us.

​	Q: What was the consequence?

​	A: Separation.

​	Q: Will not the same causes produce the same effects now?

​	A: Certainly.

Q: Do you recollect what particular terms gave rise to the mistakes of the old
royal and present federal government?

​	A: Englishmen and Americans.

​	Q: Can we be one people in interest and government?

​	A: No, because experience proves we are not one people.

Information like this was doubtless edifying to the undergraduates, many of whom
would eventually, like the faculty, claim South Carolinian nationality.
Professor Henry taught this political religion with apparently few  changes, to
sixteen and seventeen year old catechumens, between 1811 and 1845 (except the
years between 1834 and 1839, when he was not on the  faculty). Judging from the
evidence of these notebooks, and the  descriptions left by Featherstonaugh, it
seems that the faculty made a  concerted effort to catechize their students in
the political dogmas  which they had helped make fashionable.

​	The College faculty was  self-consciously producing the politicians of
the next generation. As  Cooper pointed out in his graduation address to the
class of 1821, "you  will be destined to the pursuits of agriculture, or
commerce, or  manufactures; or to the professions of law, physic, or divinity;
and it  is probable that you will all become voluntarily politicians of various
grades."  In the preface to his Lectures on Political Economy, Cooper  wrote:

​	Every well educated young man throughout the United States considers
himself a politician, and whatever other pursuits he may  embark in, he is sure
to pay enough attention to politics. Moreover, our legislature contains so many
gentlemen brought up at this institution,  and is so likely in the future to be
in the same situation, that a young man going from College without some
elementary notions relating to this modern branch of knowledge, would be but ill
prepared for the duties  which some years hence he may be called upon to
undertake.

​	South Carolina in particular and the South in general was an oral
culture,  and the primary purpose of the debate societies was to produce public
speakers who were eloquent in the pulpit or on the stump.  As President  Maxcy
noted,  "whatever the test in other

lands, here a man must speak and speak well if he expects to acquire and
maintain a

permanent influence in society."   James Henly Thornwell stated in 1856, “No
people

make such a consistent demand on the viva voce as our own, and among none is the
facility

of public speaking so indispensable to success in every walk of life.  The
debate societies

produced large numbers of men who later in life distinguished themselves for
their

oratorical abilities, and the standards of rhetorical excellence which these
societies upheld

were conspicuously high. The student body expressed its opinions through the
medium of

debate societies, the Clariosophic and the Euphradian, which were founded in
1806. Almost

every student joined. The Clariosophic was favored by those from the lowcountry,
the

Euphradian by those from the upcountry.

​	Students were only allowed to join one or the other, and the presidency
of these

societies was a highly coveted honor. The societies conducted regular meetings
in the form

of a mock legislative assembly. The meetings were extremely formal and included
a calling

of the roll. Those absent without good cause were fined. Both societies
collected dues,

provided members with books and periodicals, and obliged members to speak on
assigned

topics. They also conducted secret ceremonies, enforced their own rules, and
kept

meticulous minutes of the topics debated and the votes of the membership.
Although on

occasion the topics debated seem rather frivolous ("Ought seduction to be
punished by

death?" or "Is it decent to waltz with one's hand on a lady's waist?"), as a
rule the topics

were of a political or moral character and treated with appropriate seriousness.

​	The surviving debate society minutes offer a unique glimpse into the
political and moral thinking of the undergraduates. The topics which  they
thought worthy of debate and the votes taken afterward reveal a  great deal
about the issues which concerned them and the views that they held. Only the
Clariosophic minutes survive before 1820, and the  frequency with which
questions were proposed for controversy is probably a reasonably accurate index
of the importance attached to them. The  general trend of the voting on topics
that were repeatedly debated is a  fairly trustworthy index of overall
undergraduate opinion. Many of the  debates addressed questions regarding the
appropriate standards of  conduct for a gentleman or compared the character of
eminent historical  figures. Sometimes more concrete issues were debated. They
resolved in  the negative the question "Have we sufficient authority to believe
revelation?"  They approved of independence of judgement, and they voted that no
gentleman ought to let his "opinions in politics or any other  important subject
be influenced by any consideration of the majority”.   It was dishonorable for a
gentleman/politician to pander to the people,  to electioneer or accept
instruction from the demos was corrupt.

​	 Politics was a consuming passion of the students, and the Clariosophics
affirmed in the best Whig tradition that politics was to be studied as a
science.  The society thought highly of Thomas Jefferson and his  policies.
They generally approved of the Embargo, the Louisiana  purchase, and they
thought gunboats adequate as America's navy.  They  also endorsed Mr. Madison
and Mr. Madison's war.  These young men were  quite nationalistic, like the
other Carolina warhawks, such as Calhoun.  Their vote was affirmative and
unanimous when asked "Would it be  disadvantageous for the country for several
states to become  independent?"  The society ironically adopted an even harder
line in  1813 when the New Englanders had begun talk of disunion. They affirmed
the proposition that "If one state in our union were to form a separate
government ... the rest [would] be justified in compelling it to  reunite."
Moreover, they were sanguine about the nation's prospects,  and they affirmed
that it was probable that the government of the U.S.  would survive a century.
In this one debate society alone, questions  about political parties were
debated at least eleven times in the  fourteen years between the founding of the
society and Maxcy's death in  1820, suggesting that it was a matter of
exceptional interest. In every  case, the Clariosophics were all Federalists,
all Republicans, who  strongly disapproved of “faction”.

​	Slavery was the one topic  debated at least annually and by every class
of students, and it appears that the politics and ethics of slaveholding was the
most popular topic of undergraduate discussion. The Clariosophics debated
questions  concerning slavery at least nineteen times in the first fourteen
years.  The most striking fact about their debates on slavery was the
ambivalence and lack of unanimity among the auditors. Their uncertainty  about
slavery during the "Era of Good Feelings" paralleled the lack of  clarity and
consensus on the slave issue in American political culture  as a whole. The
students were intelligent young men who could not help  but sense the
conflicting tendencies within American political life and  the tension between
the political traditions of South Carolina and those of the other states. On
issues other than slavery, the trend of the  students' thinking is reasonably
clear, but their discussions of  slavery, at least during the Maxcy years, were
far more convoluted and  contradictory.

​	In 1808, they decided that "the condition of  African [was] meliorated
by being brought to this country," while in  1810 they voted the reverse.  In
1809 they voted that the introduction  of slavery had been disadvantageous to
the state.  In 1816 they reversed themselves and voted that it had been
advantageous.  In 1819 they had  reconsidered the introduction of slavery and
found it to be  disadvantageous.  Nonetheless, in 1820 they voted that Congress
should  not prohibit slavery in the state of Missouri.  In 1818, the
proposition, "Would a law prohibiting the introduction of slaves be  politic,
admitting it constitutional?"  was overwhelmingly rejected  (24-2). However in
the same year they resolved that "the colonization of slaves on the coast of
Africa [would] be advantageous to America."   They agreed that simple justice
required the manumission of slaves; on  the other hand they voted that free
negroes ought to be banished.  In  1819 they decided that it would be politic to
address the grievances of a slave by law, but the next year they voted that
slaves should not get  an education.  The emancipation of the slaves was
supported in 1812, but slavery was to be tolerated in 1813.

​	One trend in the  Clariosophics' debates on slavery is clear, however.
Before 1820 least  five times in fourteen years human polygenesis (the theory
that races  are the products of separate creation, hence not members of the same
species) was seriously entertained by the students. In 1806 the society  debated
the question, "Were all mankind descended from the same origin?"  The results of
this debate were not recorded, but it is likely that  the vote was in favor of
polygenesis, because the next year, 1807, these same auditors rephrased the
question to put the burden of proof on  those who accepted polygenesis. This
time the Clariosophics decided that they did not "have sufficient reason to
believe that all mankind [were] not descend[ed] from the same origin."  Although
polygenesis continued  to be a controversial subject, the preponderance of
student opinion  remained the same, and human beings were affirmed to be of the
same  species in 1816 and 1817.  Although a consensus of the undergraduates'
opinions on slavery had not coalesced by 1820, it is noteworthy that the implied
apologies for slavery contained within their topics for  discussion (such as
polygenesis) were all secular rather than  theological in their orientation.

​	Between 1770 and the mid  1820s in South Carolina, there only exists
evidence of secular defenses  of slavery, founded on naturalistic or legalistic
assumptions.   Ministers were not held in especially high regard, and slavery
was  primarily defended by lawyers and politicians. The preferred medium was
the spoken rather than the written word.  Slavery was defended in speech and
writing in terms of Constitutional law, natural law, the law of  nations,
economic necessity, climate, and superior resistance to  disease.   The curse of
Ham and other Biblical justifications of slavery never appeared in writings by
South Carolinians during this period,  although it is likely that oral
references to the Bible were made but  not recorded.

​	The evidence of student opinion from the two debate societies, the
Clariosophic and Euphradian, shows a clear movement away from the qualified
nationalism of the Maxcy era toward the sectionalism of Cooper and the other
members of the faculty. The Clariosophics  affirmed as early as 1822 the
proposition that "the causes of discord  growing out of the localities of the
different states, together with  those which arrive from the relation of the
states and the general  government, threaten the existence of the union."
Moreover, in 1826 the Clariosophics decided against the question "Should we send
our youth to northern colleges for education?" So it appears that they
understood  that they were getting a "Southern" education.

​	Between 1821 and  1835, the justice of slavery and the expediency of
emancipation was  debated by the two societies at least twenty times.  While the
students  harbored some misgivings about slavery prior to 1820, and their votes
were roughly equally divided between pro and antislavery positions,  during the
Cooper era, the students voted that slavery was justifiable  and that
emancipation was undesirable at least fifteen times out of  twenty. Some traces
of antislavery sentiment can be found in the debate  society records, but these
traces became fainter and more attenuated  over time.	Nullification and the
tariff were debated at least fifteen  times during the Cooper era, and both
societies were heavily in favor of the Nullifiers.  In the wake of the
"calculate the value of the Union"  speech, the Clariosophic society debated the
question "Was Dr. Cooper  justified in using the language he did in protesting
against the Woolens Bill?" They affirmed that he was. The Euphradians believed
that they  had "as good reason to resist the tariff of 1828 as our forefathers
had  to resist the tax on tea."  In his tract Consolidation, Cooper had  argued
that secession might be the only just response to federal  encroachment. Given
the choice, the Euphradians thought it better to  nullify than to secede.  The
Clariosophics, on the other hand, examined a different set of alternatives. They
debated the proposition, "Which is  preferable to the United States
consolidation or disunion?" Like Cooper, they chose disunion.

	It is not surprising that disunion and  secession, which were not
	controversial issues during the Maxcy era,  became controversial under
	Cooper and his radical faculty. The students  spent a considerable
	amount of time “calculating the value of the  union”. In 1821, at the
	very beginning of Cooper's tenure in office, the Clariosophic society
	affirmed that the dissolution of the union was  "probable."  During the
	Cooper years disunion was debated at least a  dozen times by the two
	societies.  Although both societies had  misgivings about disunion (the
	Clariosophics in particular voted against secession in 1828, 1829,
	1830), they were generally agreed that at  least in some circumstances,
	the tariff could "justify a rebellion."   The young men who repeatedly
	considered the option of secession in the  1820s turned out later to be
	exactly what the traveler Featherstonaugh  had predicted, "fine elements
	for future disunion."

​	Although  proslavery, ultrasectionalist political opinions did increase
among the  students during Cooper's tenure, some elements of continuity with the
political thinking of the Maxcy era are also apparent. The debate  societies
continued to discuss and generally to deprecate "party" and  "faction" in
eighteenth century Federalist style.  The students also  held onto Federalist
legacies like independent legislators, virtual  representation and indirect
elections.  Taking instructions from  constituents and electioneering remained
outside the pale.  But in other ways things had changed. After 1819 an
agricultural recession created a general and persistent economic malaise in the
state, which fostered a  more general political unease. More ominously,
beginning with the Cooper administration in 1820 the College became implicated
with politics to a greater degree than was wholesome either for the school or
the state.

​	The views of Chancellor George Dargan (’23), who eventually became an
ex officio member of the Board of Trustees, reflected many of the  beliefs he
had been exposed to in the College lectures. An associate  recalled that

​	He was a most devoted states rights man, nullifier, secessionist and
disunionist.... [H]is boast for many years was that he had never been beyond the
limits of South Carolina, and hoped never to  be under the necessity of going
out of the state.... [H]e regarded South Carolina as his country, his whole
country, and all beyond her limits  as aliens and foreigners! He was devoted to
the state and the State  alone, her honor and her glory. He once said to me.
"You old fogies may  be Union men, and glorify the Union, because you have been
educated and  brought up in that school, but the rising generation will scorn
that  Union and sever it into fragments. Mark what I tell you."

The  "rising generation" represented by the prescient Dargan did sever the
Union into fragments, and this was at least partially caused by alumni
"educated and brought up" in a different "school" from that of the  "Union men."
Official records of the debate societies are no longer  extant for most of the
1840s, but one student, a member of the  Clariosophic society, wrote in his
diary for November 1, 1846, that

​	Last night there was a spirited debate on the question, "Has a state a
right to recede from the Union" and as usual there were some who strayed far
from the question... virtually arguing the question as if it stood  thus "Is
there any cause which can give a right to a state to recede  from the Union,"
which no true son of Carolina would attempt to refute.

​	By 1846, and perhaps earlier, "no true son of Carolina" could publicly
advocate certain moderate political opinions. At a time when professor  Lieber’s
letter to the president of the College William Campbell Preston (‘12) revealed
his need to keep his opinions sub rosa, the spectrum of  political discourse on
campus had narrowed to the point where the  students also could not argue the
question of whether secession was  legitimate, but only what the proper
catalysts of secession might be.  The indoctrination by the faculty and the
general intellectual closure  of South Carolina had not rendered the students
incapable of thinking,  but it had helped truncate the domain of their thinking
to the point  where only a few select dogmas could get a respectful hearing.
The  narrow range of political opinion in the College paralleled that of the
state as a whole. During the crisis over the Compromise of 1850,  political
discourse in South Carolina differed from that of other states in that it was
largely skewed toward secession.  The major factions  were the Immediatists and
the Cooperationists, those who advocated  secession immediately and alone if
necessary, and those who advocated  secession later in concert with the rest of
the South. In the College,  and in the state as a whole, the elasticity imparted
to political  thought by tolerance and compromise gradually disappeared. It was
supplanted by a rigid orthodoxy which had catastrophic consequences.

​	The debate society records for the years 1849 to 1855 reveal that the
political views of the students were becoming more extreme and  intransigent,
more dogmatic and less appreciative of the advantages of  compromise. During the
Maxcy years the students often expressed  misgivings about slavery, but by
mid-century, it was no longer possible  for "true sons of Carolina" to believe
that slavery was other than a  positive good. The Clariosophics voted that
slavery was not a political  evil, and that the condition of the African was
ameliorated by being  brought to America, and that slavery would never be
abolished.   Moreover, they wished to have the slave trade reopened, and they
voted  that liberty was not an inalienable right.  The Euphradians decided that
inequality was necessary for the advancement of civilization.  They  voted that
slavery did not injure the character of the nation, that it  was improbable that
slavery would ever be abolished.

​	The  students of the College were secessionists as well as defenders of
slavery. In 1849, the Euphradians voted that dissolution of the Union  would not
be injurious to the South.  In 1850, the question of secession was debated by
the Euphradians three times. In February they voted  against secession, but by
November their views had hardened, and they  decided that "now would be the
proper time for the South to secede."   The next month, they voted that the
South should secede "per se."  Nor  were they unaware of the consequences of
their views. The next month  they decided that "War has been beneficial to the
human race."  They  affirmed that in the long run the influences which tended to
dissolve  the union were stronger than those which tended to keep it together.

​	The views expressed by the Clariosophics were, if anything, even more
rabidly sectional and bellicose than those of the Euphradians. They  favored a
policy of nonintercourse with the North, and they voted that  Northern
institutions should not receive southern patronage.  In 1849  and again in 1854,
the Clariosophics voted that the forces which tended  to dissolve the Union were
stronger than those that held it together.   In 1850, they decided that if the
Union were dissolved, it would be  possible to establish two separate republics.
In October of 1850, about the same time that the Euphradians were voting on
favor of secession,  the Clariosophics voted that "if the other states refuse to
act in the  present crisis, South Carolina [should] secede alone."  The
Clariosophics also voted that the legislature request the Congressmen  not take
their seats in Congress, and they believed that the South  should convene a
Congress before it seceded.  They reaffirmed their  support of secession again
in 1853.  Throughout its history, but  particularly during the decade prior to
the Civil War, the  administration, faculty and curriculum of South Carolina
College  combined with the ultra-Southern tone of political discourse within the
state to thoroughly indoctrinate the undergraduates and encourage their
pro-slavery sectional extremism. Both of the debate societies were  agreed that
if Fremont were elected in 1856, the proper response would  be secession.  The
Clariosophics affirmed that war promoted civilization and that the African slave
trade should be reopened.  The Euphradians  adopted a similarly ultra-Southern
stance, but added the peculiar  cautionary note that "party spirit" was not in
general beneficial.

​	The disparagement of  “party spirit” was one of the many incongruous
atavisms left on campus from the Federalist period. During the years  before
1860, South Carolina College was the Noah's Ark of anachronistic  political
philosophy. The gentlemen who helped found the College in  response to the
“Revolution of 1800” had gathered together as many  conservative eighteenth
century political ideas as they could find, so  that they could be kept safe on
campus while the rest of the world was  flooded by the nineteenth century.
Unfortunately, the waters of time  never receded, and as the century wore on,
the education given to these  planters' sons moved from old fashioned to
atavistic, from conservative  to reactionary.

​	In the late antebellum period, alumni sincerely  talked about “faction”
the way their Federalist grandfathers had, but  they were nonetheless among the
bitterest and most intransigent  partisans in Congress. In 1849, Congressman
Woodward (‘26) of South  Carolina struck a Federalist note when he insisted that
“I belong to no  faction on this floor…”, despite the fact that he was a
secessionist  attempting to obstruct the Compromise of 1850.   On campus
atavistic  Federalist political mores were still conspicuous during the 1850s.
One of the professors at the College noted in his diary that he had met

…a candidate for the Intendancy of the town-He had the impudence to ask me for
my vote-Will he get it? He missed the figure in this instance- I  had no
intention of voting for him before I certainly shall not do it  now. I think it
borders very closely upon insult to ask a gentleman for  his vote. It is at
least unmitigated rudeness and gross indelicacy.

Alumni were often reluctant to shed their taboo against electioneering even
after relocating outside the state. James Dellett (‘10) moved to Alabama and
eventually went to Congress but his friends had to beg him to  become a
candidate. “…[Y]ou have not even given a hearty consent that  your friends
should run you. I have long been aware that electioneering  is repugnant to your
feelings and has never on any condition been  submitted to…”  Standards of
political etiquette left over from the  eighteenth century were common in the
College in the middle of the  nineteenth century. The faculty believed that only
honorable gentlemen  were the legitimate bearers of political power and
electioneering was  dishonorable behavior by the candidate bordering on insult
to the  gentleman voter. Honor was the bridge between the politics and ethics of
the planter class and the undergraduates' concern with personal honor  was
pervasive both in and out of the classroom. One of the professors,  Joseph
LeConte, wrote,

I had never previously seen, (nor have I  since) so high a sense of honor among
students in relation to one  another and to the faculty. No form of
untruthfulness among themselves  or toward the faculty (such, for example, as
cheating on examinations)  was for a moment tolerated. Any student suspected of
such practices was  cut by his fellow students and compelled to leave.

​	Unlike other  colleges both North and South, South Carolina College saw
virtually no  cheating, theft, lying or other dishonorable behavior. In fifty
seven  years of College disciplinary records (1805-62), there are many crimes
of violence, self-indulgence and pride, but very few of dishonesty. In
particular, drunken brawling and the physical abuse of the College  servants
(slaves) was common, but there are almost no records of theft,  lying, or
cheating on exams.  The undergraduates shared a certain ethos; their behavior
reflected in many ways a commonly agreed upon set of  judgements of right and
wrong. As one alumnus said, "The College boys of that time seemed to draw a well
defined circle, within which there were things counted mean and low. Into that
circle very few students dared  intrude. Unfortunately, the radius of that
circle was rather short."   Breaches of honor and etiquette were not tolerated
among the students.  No other students would have anything to do with such
pariahs, and they  inevitably left campus in disgrace.

​	It is noteworthy that the  debate societies sometimes resolved
themselves into quasi-judicial  bodies that administered oaths, heard evidence,
and delivered verdicts  that the faculty was apparently never appraised of.
These infrequent  proceedings were typically conducted about alleged breaches of
honor  such as theft, and usually resulted in a collective ritual of expulsion,
then ostracism and social death. In 1815 Thomas Colcock was accused of  stealing
a gown. He was convicted, censured, and expelled from the  Clariosophic society.
He withdrew from College in disgrace. In May of  1820, John Chambers was accused
of stealing ten dollars from a fellow  member and buying wine. In their search
for the facts they took  testimony from one of the College "servants" though
such testimony was  not legal, convicted the accused and solemnly expelled him
from  membership. He left campus immediately.

​	In 1812, another  Clariosophic was expelled from the society for tarring
and feathering  one Ephraim Merritt (apparently a resident of Columbia who was
not a  student).  Although the faculty minutes show no record of disciplinary
proceedings for this offence, an alumnus who was on campus at the time  reported
that the perpetrator was "driven from the College as much by  the indignation of
his fellows as by the action of the faculty."  In  fact, the faculty took no
action at all: practically speaking, this  young man was ejected from College by
his peers. It is not hard to  imagine why there were so few known instances of
"dishonorable" conduct; the students could expel directly, the faculty could
only apply to the  Trustees.

​	Drinking debts were debts of honor, which insured the  solvency of more
than one tavernkeeper in town.    One alumnus, Dr.  Marion Sims (’32) recalled

​	Mr. Lyon's saloon was patronized by  every young man who had ever gone
through South Carolina College, from  its foundation up to my day. ... He would
trust them to any amount, and  for any length of time. He never asked them for
money; he lent them  money if they wanted it, and was looked upon as the
student's friend  always. When I left College I owed him two hundred dollars. I
had been  there two years and had not paid him a cent. He was never known to
accept interest on any debt any young man had contracted and was never  known to
have charged them for any article that they had not had or more than it was
worth. I said to him "Mr. Lyons, I am afraid you have lost a great deal of money
by us boys." He said, "No sir, I have never lost a  dollar in my life. I have
been here twenty years, trusting students, and I have never lost a debt yet.
Whenever a student returns home he is  almost sure to send me the money very
soon or bring it to me as you have done. If he fails to do it he writes me and
explains why he cannot do  it."

​	It is worth remembering that the bar bill of light drinking Dr. Sims,
two hundred dollars, was greater than the cost of his tuition over the same
period of time.  Mr. Lyon's patrons, who allegedly  amounted to every student in
the College, seem to have been very  trustworthy, far more honest than
undergraduates in this century. Given  that they were so punctilious in paying
their drinking debts, it seems  odd that thefts by the students were
occasionally reported during the  Cooper era. The students did not steal from
each other (or if they did  it was not reported to the faculty), but they did
engage in petty  pilfering, as was the case in 1826 when several students were
disciplined for turkey stealing .  It seems that this kind of theft, was viewed
as more of a prank than larceny, and thus not a breach of honor, as would be the
case if a student failed to repay a debt to the  student's friend, Mr. Lyons.

​	The regulations written by the  Trustees stated that "The rewards and
punishments of this institution  shall be addressed to the sense of duty and the
principles of honor and  shame," and honor was by far the most important element
in College  discipline.  When called before the faculty, to the "bull ring" as
the  young men called it, the students were informed of the charges against
them, and then simply asked to affirm or deny the charges. If the  accused
exculpated himself, this was taken to be prima facie evidence of innocence; if
he admitted guilt or refused to answer, he was  appropriately punished.

​	What is most remarkable about this  procedure is that with one or two
possible exceptions, in the thousands  of faculty inquiries into student
misbehavior between 1805 and 1860, no  one is known to have lied.  Admitting
guilt might draw three months  suspension, to lie was to dishonor oneself in the
eyes of the other  students, which would result in a permanent and pitiless
ostracism that  was the social analog of capital punishment.  To be demoted from
the  ranks of gentlemen was a steep social fall. The few students who
dishonored themselves were permanently unable to socialize, marry,  conduct
business, or get an education as they would have otherwise.  "Social Death" also
awaited any student who, when in the "bull ring,"  informed on his classmates.
To implicate another was a breach of honor.  Eventually the faculty ceased even
to ask those who confessed  misbehavior about the others involved, because such
questions were  simply never answered. It was common knowledge that the
professors were  lenient but the student body was implacable. The students could
afford  to be intransigent because they were or would become independent
gentlemen. The professors were learned "hirelings," and it behooved
"dependents" to be cautious and this had an adverse effect on  discipline.

​	Many disciplinary problems started in Commons which  was run by a
"Steward" appointed by the Trustees who made a profit on  the fixed rate he
charged the students. The Steward was sometimes  tempted to cut corners, and in
1811 he purchased a sorry excuse for a  bull which looked to him like extra cash
and to the students like tough  beef. A public spirited group of undergraduates
drove the unfortunate  beast down to the Congaree river and drowned it. This
episode prompted a campus bard to immortalize their heroism in a mock epic, "The
Boviac,"  which, sadly, only survives in fragmentary form.  The faculty, who
were  perhaps partial to tender steaks, were unable to identify the culprits,
although the poem contained certain clues:

​     	Whitey Brooks and Old Brevard,

​     	Each by a horn did hold him hard;

​     	Johnny Gayle and Billy Cain on either side

​     	Did stand, and Henry Conner on his back did ride

​     	And although he was very tired, yet howsoever

​     	We drove him away down to the river.

Early in the history of the College typical patterns of misbehavior were
established and reenacted with minor variations thereafter. Most of the
students’ individual transgressions were similar to those seen today:  “drunk
and disorderly”. A tradition of collective transgressions emerged and frequently
the students esprit d’corps would erupt into riotous  violence.  Some of the
entertainments favored by the students of the  College are rarely enjoyed today.

​	Evenings could be gloomy before the advent of electric lights, so
students took the initiative by  throwing "fireballs," on the assumption that
the faculty would not mind.  If, by some stroke of luck, both a fireball and a
dog were available,  one might playfully be attached to the other.  The howling
beast would  streak across campus, and the boys would raise the humorous cry of
"Dog  Afire!" which would gain the attention of all their classmates and some
of their teachers, and doubtless, the dog as well.  The professors lived in
wooden houses and did not especially care for this quaint custom,  but they
liked having dogs set afire better than they liked having "Mr.  Pelham's dog
shot" by some exuberant young marksmen in one of the  dormitories.

​	Other kinds of misbehavior fostered by the College were more common and
less conspicuous. William Grayson(’09), remembered that

​	The raw freshman is subjected to the influence of companions a little
older than himself. He is anxious to emulate the high spirited example  of his
senior. He makes rapid advances in smoking, chewing, playing  billiards,
concocting sherry cobblers, gin slings and mint juleps,  becomes an adept at
whist and "Old Sledge," in champaign[sic] and hot  suppers, to say nothing of
more questionable matters, and takes degrees  in arts and sciences about which
his diploma is altogether silent.

​	The "arts and sciences" not mentioned in the diploma of the College are
frequently mentioned in the faculty minutes, and these records reveal  many
"questionable matters" in great detail. The hellions implicated in  such
“questionable matters” received a notoriety which was not unwelcome provided the
consequences were not too severe. In 1853 on professor  noted in his diary “When
a boy or idle youth finds out he lacks the mind to distinguish himself in
learning, he straightaway seeks notoriety by  devising mischief. The dullest
intellects soon become most proficient in vicious acts.  Discipline was
conspicuously lax. One English traveler  who visited the College in 1819 noted
that:

There are 125  students who are very disorderly, frequently disturbing
congregations on Sunday, because the Doctor [Maxcy] is too idle to preach, and
thereby  keep them together. [I] Saw several of these learned young gentlemen
stretched out on a table, with their learned legs carelessly hanging out of
their chamber windows, which seemed nearly all broken. Want of  discipline is
too palpable here, but there is no lack of whiskey.

​	In cases of conspicuously outrageous behavior, the faculty temporarily
banished the offender with “rustication”. William Wade's extracurricular
activities were a good specimen of the kind of behavior that drew  suspension.
He went too far on February 21, 1810, when the faculty found that

​	William Wade was concerned in making a festive  entertainment at the
house of an infamous mulatto woman, that he carried a pistol with which he
intended to defend property not his own, that he actually threatened to take the
lives of some who entered the house--  for these reasons besides a peculiar
obstinacy discovered in Wade in the presence of the faculty…

​	Wade (’10) was treated harshly for his flagrant misconduct. The faculty
insisted that he leave campus and stay at home for the last week in February and
the whole of March and April. Since Wade hailed from Richland county, the same
county in which the  College was located, he didn't have far to go. Chastened by
the rigors  of being exiled to a place within a day's travel (and perhaps also
by  the toll extracted by such "festive entertainments"), the  eighteen-year-old
Wade returned in May and graduated the following  December. He eventually moved
to Louisiana and became a judge in Baton  Rouge.

​	The alumni were a remarkably violent group of young men,  hypersensitive
to slights and easily provoked. While the use of the cane was most usual, the
slaves who worked on campus were chastised with an  imaginative variety of
instruments: a fist, a knife, a

broomstick, a hickory, a brickbat, a whip; whatever was handy.  The
administration  had precious little success in restraining the hot-headed young
men from resorting to their fists or weapons when displeased. James Henly
Thornwell (’31) knew the problem well. He was the president of the  College when
he reported to the Trustees that the undergraduates'  mistreatment of the
College's slaves an evil "That I find harder to  reach than any other...."
Thornwell believed that this was a matter

of peculiar delicacy. The young men sometimes allow themselves to become
irritated and inflict chastisement which are anything but judicious. The faculty
in most cases have nothing to go on but the complaints of the  servants
themselves. To impress these servants that they are exempt from all direct
responsibility to the young men is to give them license to  idleness, to let the
students punish them is to subject them to  occasional cruelty.... I have
endeavored to enforce the rule that the  students shall strike a servant only
for insolence, and that idleness  and inattention shall be made matters of
complaint only to the bursar.  But I must confess that I have only partially
succeeded.

In 1814  the faculty noted that “Frederick S. Belser of the senior class, had
beaten one of the College servants under the impression that the servant had
made a report to the professors of his having card parties in his  room....
Belser acknowledged the fact and maintained that he had a right to act as he had
done.”

​	Belser was admonished.  However, for  particularly conspicuous
mistreatment of slaves admonition alone was not sufficient, and an apology was
demanded - not to the slave, of course,  but to the faculty for a breach of the
peace. In 1817, about a month  before he found himself on the losing end of a
knife fight with one of  his classmates, Mr. Hunter

​	... being somewhat unwell, had sent  for his breakfast, which was not
brought.... Going himself into the hall after commons was over, he proceeded to
chastise the servant for not  bringing his breakfast.... The Steward appeared
and threatened to slap  his face if he did not desist...Hunter drew his penknife
out of his  pocket and declared that he would stab the Steward if he struck him,
maintaining at the same time that he had a right to beat the servant  when
insolent to him and he would exercise the same.

​	Hunter's  "apology was taken as sufficient atonement for the offence."
Since the  Steward had "undertaken to inflict personal chastisement on Hunter,"
the faculty determined that they "... would not be justified in requiring a
personal concession to the Steward." The steward objected strenuously  to this,
but the faculty would not budge. Though an adolescent, Mr.  Hunter was an
honorable gentleman, and despite the fact that the Steward was a generation his
senior, he was not Mr. Hunter's social equal. Mr.  Hunter certainly could not be
expected to accept "personal chastisement" in the way a slave might.   To be
punched or whipped or most  importantly, caned, was a symbolic dishonor as well
as a physical  attack. It is worthwhile comparing this conflict with an incident
in  which a slave was caned by a student. The faculty noted that "Mr. Walsh  was
reported for punishing a servant. He stated that the servant had  been very
impudent to him and he struck him once with his cane. After  this explanation,
the faculty did not think fit to pursue the matter  further."   The faculty and
students understood that for a gentleman,  engaging in ritual violence was an
obligation, not an option. Use of the cane was a token of status that could not
be ignored.

​	In 1810, a complaint was made against William Gill

of the senior class for cruelly beating a servant belonging to the  steward; ...
Gill had been summoned to attend at the Presidents house  but refused or
neglected to obey.... Gill appeared particularly  obstinate and determined not
to submit to the laws nor the officers of  the College. Gill was [again] ordered
before the faculty... he offered  no satisfactory excuses....

In a unanimous resolution the faculty suspended Gill, declaring that Gill's
"disobedience to the summons of  the president was the most aggravated and
criminal part of his conduct;  as examples of this kind have a direct tendency
to subvert the laws and  government of this College...."  It is easy to see why
the mistreatment  of slaves was a chronic problem; with discipline as lax as it
was, the  students expected that all but the most flagrant irregularities would
be tolerated, and "cruelly beating a slave" was not nearly so serious an
offence as ignoring the president's summons.

​	Under interrogation  by the faculty in 1821, one student declared in the
“bullring” that  while it was true that he had attacked the valedictorian of his
class  with a knife, he stated as an extenuating circumstance that it was
customary for the students to carry concealed weapons. “On being charged with
this offense, he made a candid confession of his fault and with  respect to the
circumstances of being armed with a dirk, observed that  it was not
premeditatedly, but the effect of a custom, which in  violation of the laws, has
been long prevalent among the students.”  The young man was denied his diploma,
but the students remained well armed. On campus as in society at large it was
always possible for small  issues to lead to violence. A sharp retort to be
taken as an insult, an  insult might lead to a punch or a rap with a cane, which
might be met in turn with a dagger or pistol.

In 1817, senior John Starke Hunter (’17) had "assailed Holsey [of the junior
class] with very opprobrious  and insulting language and manner on what is
deemed by the faculty to be frivolous grounds thereby provoking him to violate
the laws...."  The  faculty disapproved of, but extenuated Holsey's carrying
concealed  weapons. The faculty censured Hunter for "using opprobrious language
and violently assaulting Holsey, compelling him, as he felt his inferiority in
bodily strength required, to resort to his weapon in self defense."  Both were
suspended, but Hunter also took home with him "many severe  wounds [made] with a
dirk or dagger."   Mr. Hunter never returned to  campus, so in 1850 when he
represented Alabama at the Nashville  Convention, he was doubtless gratified to
see so many fellow alumni  there.

​	In May of 1837, half a dozen students went out for a meal and a few
drinks and then to a circus which had come to town.  Campbell Bryce (‘37), as
usual, brought his Bowie knife with him. A brawl  erupted, one of the students
was about to be hit by an Irish laborer  named Lynch, so seventeen year old
Bryce stepped in and stabbed Lynch in the chest and killed him.  The faculty
suspended all involved. At his  trial, Bryce pled self-defense and was
acquitted. Bryce and his  companions were readmitted, and they graduated as
scheduled with the  rest of their class. Bryce’s defense attorney was the
eloquent William  Campbell Preston (’12), who became president of the College in
1846.  Because of their powerful social connections, students sometimes
betrayed a sense of being above the law; they flouted the law, both  collegiate
and civil, with aplomb. Consequently, the Trustees disarmed  the students de
jure, if not de facto.

​	In the wake of the "late riotous transactions at the circus," the
Trustees resolved

​	That if any student shall, after notice of this resolution, keep in his
room or within the College or wear about his person in the College in  the town
of Columbia or its vicinity any pistol, dirk, sword cane, Bowie knife or other
deadly weapon he shall on being convicted thereof be  forthwith suspended and
removed from College and reported for  expulsion.... [T]his Board views with the
most decided disapprobation  the practice of any student carrying a deadly and
concealed weapon as  unworthy of any citizen, and much more of any young
gentleman engaged in the peaceful exercises of this institution.

However, the  attempts to disarm the student body were unsuccessful. Weapons
were  commonly kept on campus despite the regulations and this contributed to a
violent ethos.

​	Guns rather than knives were the weapon of choice on campus. Many
students kept matched pairs of pistols in their rooms,  despite the fact that
mere possession of firearms on campus was grounds  for expulsion. Many
undergraduates were reported to the faculty for  firing guns on campus, and the
professors took a particularly dim view  of those students who discharged
weapons indoors.  Judging from the  frequency of weapons violations, it seems
that the possession of dueling pistols was so fashionable that there were
probably times when there  were more pistols on campus than students.

​	Violence and honor  were inextricably linked in the students' minds, but
Rev. Thornwell  (’31) did as much as he could to sever the connection. In his
address to the graduating class of 1855 he inveighed against the pervasive
violence and the reflexive resort to weapons:

I know the people of this state well, and I am sure that if you answer honestly,
according  to the sentiment which is almost an instinct with the young men of
South Carolina, you would reply at once that honor is the pervading principle of
your hearts.... [W]ith many it is nothing but a blind impulse  prompting to
insolence and headiness and rashness and violence. It is  restricted for the
most part to the single point of being quick and  implacable in resentment. To
be a man of honor is to stand always with a drawn sword, ready to fight upon the
least provocation. Brute courage  is made to take the place of charity, not only
in covering a multitude  of sins, but in being a substitute for every other
virtue. This is the  honor which underlies the duel.... I want to see no
blusterers among  you; none who rely on ferocity rather than virtue to maintain
a position in society.

​	The self conceptions of these young men,  simultaneously inflated and
archaic, predisposed them to rash displays  of personal courage. With
conspicuous bravado so common, it is easy  enough to see why dueling was
recurrent among the undergraduates and why strictly observed rules of politeness
were necessary. Rules of  gentlemanly deportment were an unannounced part of the
curriculum. In  later life the alumni were distinguished by a punctilious
courtesy.  Henry Hilliard, (‘26) Whig Congressman from Alabama, was a minister
who  had also been a professor at the University of Alabama. Despite his
strident advocacy of slavery and states rights, he was also the epitome  of
politesse. As one observer noted:

…you must remember that Mr.  Hilliard is a very polite man, always tolerant and
respectful toward the opposition. You say he does not abuse the democracy? Why
sir, he never  abuses anybody! I have heard him preach, and I have never yet
heard him  abuse the Devil, sir!…and I would guarantee that should he meet the
Devil in a public place he would lift his hat!…

​	When the  students overstepped the bounds of courtesy, the faculty
(which was  generally very lenient), became suddenly rigorous. Severity was
particularly evident in cases which involved discourtesy towards women,  because
polished manners were a mark of the "Carolina gentleman," and  perhaps also
because rudeness toward a lady was likely to result in  violence from one of her
male relatives. In November,1859, three  students, Mssrs. Butler, Harriss and
Lesene, were brought up before the  faculty for misbehavior at a local fair.
They were charged with public  drunkenness, possession of deadly weapons, and
disrespect toward ladies. Of these three infractions, the last was treated as
most offensive.  “Dr. Reynolds reported Butler of the freshmen [class] for being
intoxicated going in that condition to the fair; having a knife under  his
sleeve behaving in a disorderly manner. Dr. Leconte reported him for being
intoxicated on the night proceeding.”  Butler's garden variety  misbehavior drew
the usual suspension. Ladies were not involved. At the  same fair,

​	P.B. Harriss of the junior class [was] reported for  being intoxicated
and going in that condition to the Palmetto fair and  behaving in a disorderly
manner- insulting a lady etc. He appeared  before the faculty and stated that he
was drinking on the occasion  specified but not drunk: denied having a pistol
and denied insulting a  lady; denied putting his hand upon a lady; recollected
most of his  conduct.

Since Harris recollected “most” of his conduct and denied the accusation, he was
only suspended six months.

​	Mr. Lesene of the sophomore class was to be expelled for drunken
discourtesy towards ladies, despite the fact that no pistols or knives  were
involved.

​	H. R. Lesene of the sophomore class [was reported] for being intoxicated
and going in that condition to the Palmetto fair; cursing a lady and behaving
generally in a disorderly manner. He stated in reply to these charges that he
was drinking and went to the fair;  denied cursing a lady; asked a young lady
with [whom] he was not  acquainted to be allowed to see her home; was told by
another lady that  he had better find the door; that [this] was no place for
him; admitted  that he talked loudly and cursed in the presence of ladies. The
faculty  resolved to suspend him indefinitely and report him for expulsion. He
afterward appeared and stated that he meant nothing disrespectful in  asking the
young lady to be allowed to escort her home; that the young  ladies were all
speaking to the young men without an introduction asking them to take chances in
raffles etc. and consequently he did not feel  that the same formalities were
necessary here as elsewhere ... the  Faculty agreed to reconsider....

The faculty did reconsider the  sentence of expulsion, since in the disorder of
a fair the usual  "formalities" were not required, and no disrespect was
intended by the  now sober young man. The punishment imposed was lessened to the
longest  suspension recorded in the minutes of the faculty, fourteen months.
Ironically, Mr. Lesene's suspension did not terminate until January  1861, when
the time for academics had passed.

​	In an 1857 letter, one student wrote to his father that he had just
heard a splendid  lecture on "Chivalry," that several young men were expected to
duel the  next day, and that the architecture of the new State House "reminds as
much of the Feudal ages as the frequency of duels does."  Reflecting  back on
his College days, this same student noted the effect the  educational regimen of
the College had on the undergraduates:

​	By  the time he had reached his senior year, he had evolved into a
personage of great dignity, who would have been immensely shocked by the
boyishness of the modern student, and could by no means have understood  the
modern interest in football and baseball, games to his mind  belonging normally
to schoolboy days. Almost the only athletic amusement in which any of the
students participated was a grand tournament that  took place at the Hampton
racetrack near Columbia. Many of the students  engaged in this, assuming each
some chivalrous character and arraying  himself in appropriate costume.

The ideal of personal honor was  sufficiently strong among these young men that
by eighteen or nineteen  these personages of great dignity could only disdain
boyish games.  Intramural sports for them meant jousting.

It is clear enough why these young men would be temperamentally inclined toward

taking an active part in the impending Civil War, aside from the political
issues at stake. Not only were they hypersensitive to the rules of  respectable
deportment, they were also exceedingly touchy about insults  offered to their
family, their state, their section and their College.   It is highly significant
that their feelings about women and their  families were implicated in their
thought and speech about politics.

​	It is noteworthy that in public discourse, alumni habitually referred
to the state of South Carolina as “she”, self-consciously using the  feminine
pronoun. As Congressman Stephen Miller (’08) stated in an  address to Congress
“It may be asked, if this bill be passed, what  rights are left to South
Carolina? She has the right to slink from her  position, and, like a thievish
slave, submit to the lash of a master.  Nay, she has the further right left
her-that right which Lucretia had,  after she was dishonored.”  Passage of the
offending bill was equated  with rape. Rhetorically, South Carolina was a woman
that needed  protection. If that protection failed, suicide was a proper
response to  dishonor. Within the Code of Honor, insults to a lady under the
protection of a gentleman, were more serious than insults given directly to the
gentleman himself.  The habitual use of the feminine pronoun  advertised the
speakers readiness to defend his own honor by defending  the honor of the state
with extraordinary rigor. One alumnus wrote from  Alabama that even though he
opposed nullification, South Carolina had  nurtured him and now “I could
not…strike a blow which would wound the  name or lacerate the cheek of my mother
state…”.  Any self respecting  gentleman would fight to protect the honor of his
mother.

​	 Pressure to violently validate honor, which meant certifying patrician
status in a society whose most notable feature is inequality, was  terrific.
Dueling was a persistent problem and the undercurrent of  violence in the
College produced some grim practical jokes. A favorite  was for a group of
friends to conspire to create a mock quarrel between  one of them and another
student who would be the butt of their joke. The “slight” would be trivial, and
the victim would naturally prefer not to duel, but the “friends” would force his
hand, threatening dishonor if  “satisfaction” were not given. Hedged in by the
cult of honor, most  agreed. As the same alumnus recorded, “The boys got up a
mock duel one  day between Frank Massey and Robert Burns. Frank was in on the
secret  but poor Burns was not. But he behaved bravely. They fired cork bullets
at each other. I have always thought it a hard and foolish game to play  off on
a good fellow like Robert Burns.”

​	Other jokes were still more dangerous. State Judge Joseph Whitner (’18),
recalled an incident from his College days:

​	He was a student in Union village when the deputy sheriff came to
arrest him on some trivial matter. Playfully he pulled out a pistol and  told
the deputy he would not be arrested. He did it as a joke and  supposed it would
be received as such by a man whom he knew very well  and with whom he was on the
best of terms. But mistaking the motive the  deputy flew into a passion and
jumped from his horse and said "I will  arrest you at the risk of my life."
Judge Whitner said his nature  suddenly seemed to change, all reflection thrown
away, and if the man  had advanced he would have shot and perhaps killed him.

At least  one of the students could see the humor in pulling a gun on a sheriff
in the process making an arrest, and many, including some who habitually
carried weapons, had volatile tempers. The students moved from words to  actions
with remarkable ease, and physical violence between students   was the most
vexing breach of discipline the faculty had to handle.

​	The most daunting and difficult problem the faculty faced was
controlling the students' violence was timely information, particularly  since
the faculty were only certain to be appraised of a violent  encounter if they
were present while it occurred, if it was reported by a third party, or if it
left a corpse. The faculty never heard about the  following intriguing case,
which only survives in the autobiography of  an alumnus. One freshman, J. P.
Cole,

(‘32) was mildly harassed by another student. He found that

​	Soon after he joined College, he was sitting one night [and]... there
was a rap at his door. He said "Come in." The door opened and a ghost  appeared,
in the shape of a tall man, with a sheet wrapped around him,  and a dough face.
Cole was no more frightened at that ghost than he was  at himself. He just
quietly looked around and said, "My young friend, I  advise you not to repeat
that experiment." The fellow was very much  disappointed... Cole thought it very
likely that this ghost would repeat the visit at some future time, and so he
prepared himself. He had a  pistol, which he had laid out at the end of the
table, loaded and  cocked; determined, if the ghost reappeared again, to give
him a "pop".  About a week or ten days after, at the same hour of night, it
tapped  again at the door...he laid his hand upon the pistol and said "Come in,"
in response... Sure enough, it was that very ghost again. Cole did not  say one
word. He simply raised his pistol and fired at the ghost's head. The ghost
fortunately jerked its head sideways just in time to prevent  its perforating
its brain. It struck the facing on the door, just on a  level with the ghost's
head.

The fifteen year old Cole was more than ready to turn a fake ghost into a real
one. Despite the fact that  he was not afraid and knew he was in no danger, Cole
showed no  hesitation in trying to kill his classmate. The faculty took no
notice  of this incident, but the students surely did. Cole and many of his
peers became lawyers; when Cole became Chief Justice of the Texas  Supreme
Court, members of the bar doubtless understood that contempt of  court could be
dangerous.

​	Young men with very violent  dispositions were not barred from high
political office. Quite the  contrary, force of character, expressed in the form
of a morbid  sensitivity to slights, was highly regarded by the electorate. A
man who had established his credentials to the status of honorable gentleman by
dueling, attempting to duel, or failing that trying to kill his man in  the
street, could be highly regarded by the community.  If such a man  was a
persuasive speaker and had appropriate family connections, a  college degree was
secondary. A position awaited him in the legislature, or perhaps in Washington.

​	One such student was called before the faculty in May of 1837 “…for
riotous and disorderly conduct in the  campus late at night on Wednesday
halloing and singing and using profane language, being apparently intoxicated
... he stated in his defense  that he had been to an eating house and drunk
wine, but was not aware  that he had made much noise, and did not think he was
intoxicated.”   Clearly this young man was a plausible speaker, who could bend
the truth without quite breaking it. He avoided suspension in this incident
because of his smooth rhetoric and high academic standing. Yet he could  not
save himself from suspension when he was called up the next year for a dispute
over electioneering he had with Mr. Symonds (‘38), of the  senior class.

​	[He] stated that the difficulty between himself and Mr. Symonds had its
origin in the Clariosophic society.... [He] was a  candidate for a society honor
and Mr. Symonds said to him that he would  not electioneer against him. It
appeared to his satisfaction that he did whereupon he said to some of his
friends that Symonds had falsified his word, which coming to the notice of the
latter, sent [him] a challenge  to fight a duel. [He] took the challenge and
repaired to Mr. Symonds  rooms, and told him they were both boys and under
College laws, that he  would give him a boys satisfaction [a fistfight], but
would not fight  while in College stating that he used the words "Falsified his
word to  me" in reference to his conduct after saying he would not use his
influence to prejudice his election. Mr. Symonds denied that he had done so when
he gave him the lie direct. This led to a personal conflict [a  fistfight].

​	This dispute might have stayed at the level of an  intramural boxing
match, and it would never have come before the faculty had it not been for the
touchiness of the young men. Symonds (’38) had  apparently gotten the worst of
the bout, and his honor had been  impeached. The pugilistic narrator stated that
the next day as he was  going to commons,

​	... a friend informed him that he would be  attacked by Mr. Symonds. He
knew that he had sent for a pair of pistols, [that] he saw the negro boy take
them to his room that morning, begged  [him] to take over a pistol which he put
in his hands. He declined doing this until urgently pressed to do so by his
friend saying again that he knew that Mr. Symonds had received a pair of pistols
and would make an  attack upon him. On leaving the Hall, Symonds approached him
having his  cloak on which prevented him from seeing whether Mr. Symonds had a
pistol or not. Mr. Symonds handed him a challenge and said, "Do you  refuse to
accept it or notice it?" He replied "Yes.", Mr. Symonds then  drew a horse whip
and gave him a cut, He bid him (Symonds) stand off and defend himself and he
drew his pistol. Mr. Symonds went a few paces and exclaimed "I am not armed!".
On hearing this he threw the pistol away  and said "I will now give you a boy's
satisfaction if that is what you  wish." and they engaged in a personal
encounter again.

​	Mr.  Symonds was expelled. The restraint shown by the other student got
him  off with mere suspension. He was not expelled until he came back the  next
year as a senior. He was called before the faculty to account for

​	riotous behavior on the preceding Sunday evening. He stated that he had
heard from a negro boy an exaggerated report that his brother had been  carried
by the town Marshall in an ignominious manner to the Guard  House- that in his
excitement he took a pair of pistols which he had  sometime ago been presented
him by a friend, and which had been lying at the bottom of his trunk, ... that
he loaded his pistols and proceeded  to the guard house with the design of
rescuing his brother from his  supposed ignominious treatment and distress. He
admitted that after he  found his brother no longer in confinement he continued
to display his  pistols in a threatening manner and proclaimed his intention of
shooting the aggressors. He said in extenuation of his conduct that he had not
considered himself subject to the discipline of the College because his
examinations were completed and that his offence against the laws of God and of
the bench was one which the natural excitement of the incident  and the fervor
of youth should render trivial.

​	The Trustees  voted for expulsion, however the reputation of this young
man did not  suffer. Five years later he was elected to the state legislature.
His  popularity increased and he was elected to Congress. When this alumnus  got
to Washington, some observers were shocked when he took offense at a speech and
then broke a cane over the head of the Senator from  Massachusetts. There was no
need for surprise. Preston Brooks (’39) was  raised in a culture in which
violence was routinized in the form of  etiquette. It would have been a breach
of manners for Brooks not to  respond to Senator Sumner's speech by doing him
serious physical injury  with the appropriate ceremonial instrument. Since
Sumner was not an  honorable gentleman who lived by the code duello, caning was
the only  proper course.  From Brooks' perspective, Sumner doubtless got off
lightly. Among the gentleman of South Carolina, a man could be shot for a great
deal less than insulting Brooks' uncle and calling slavery an  evil.

​	Antagonisms between students sometimes simmered for years  before
boiling over in later political life. The faculty noted in 1818  that Henry
Nixon (’18), a senior, had published two handbills addressed  to the students of
South Carolina College,

​	Respecting other  students, which were calculated to produce unhappy
consequences among  the students in general and which unavoidably exposed him to
the most  severe punishments which the laws could inflict. ...it was determined
that, in consequence of his signing an acknowledgement, dictated by the
faculty, and agreeing to publish in the state gazette, at his own  expense, a
statement of the reasons for the faculty's conduct in this  case, he should be
permitted to retain his standing.

Nixon was  also required to submit "... proofs of reconciliation between him and
the only party under College jurisdiction."  Nixon's public  acknowledgement is
not available, but it appears that he had "posted" a  classmate for cowardice
after having a challenge rejected. Nixon (’18)  was killed by Thomas Hopkins
(’22) in a spectacular duel in 1829 and it  may have been Hopkins or one of his
relations that Nixon posted. One  writer stated

Col. Nixon was one of the most gifted young men in  the state. He was talented,
sensitive, and ambitious. Gentle and  courteous to his friends, but haughty
dictatorial and overbearing to  foes, he was pledged to a series of duels when
he fell dead on the field under the unerring aim of Thomas Hopkins. They were
both fine specimens of elegant manhood. Hopkins was graceful, easy and very much
be loved  by his friends and very large family connections. He was a remarkable
shot and felt confident he would kill Nixon…

​	One alumnus wrote  of this fatal encounter: “A Duel was an event. There
was a charming  mystery about it. The secrecy attached to it, the gravity, the
importance attached to it, … all imparted to the great event the charm  of a
profound interest. It was a play, sometimes a tragedy, more  exciting than any
exhibited at the theatre.”  One observer wrote of the  formidable public
spectacle that ended this long running feud: “We had a show here two or three
days ago. A party from Camden came here to fight a duel, and, after preparing
themselves, went to the ground at noonday, through Broad street with as much
parade as if Lafayette had been  coming, carriages, gigs, sulkies, and horsemen
following to witness the  bloody deed. One of the combatants was killed
instantly…”.  Although  Hopkins (’22) killed Nixon (’18) before a crowd of
witnesses, and he  afterward ran across the state line back into South Carolina,
he was in  little legal danger because he had powerful friends like his second,
former Governor John Lyde Wilson, (who published a book containing the  rules
for “the Code” as generally understood in South Carolina).    Nixon’s second was
college friend, William P. McWillie (‘17), who was  eventually elected to
Congress from and Governor of Mississippi.

​	 The immense force of public opinion regarding honorable reputation is
highlighted in a revealing difficulty that arose between the President  of the
College Thomas Cooper and senior Thomas Palmer in 1822.  Palmer  wrote to his
mother that one evening some of his classmates had returned from a ball "not
altogether sober."  He accepted their invitation to  share some sweets with them
when Professors Cooper and Vanuxem came to  the dormitory to discipline the
rowdy students. The boys tried physical  opposition, and drew a cot and some
furniture across the stairs. One  student hurled a chair down the stairs.
Undaunted, the professors burst  in and demanded the boys names. One refused,
the other replied he was a  citizen.

​	The request for anonymity and the avowal of citizenship did not satisfy
Cooper's inquiring mind, particularly since he had  narrowly missed being hit
with a chair thrown down the stairs by Mr.  Palmer's accomplice.

​	Dr. Cooper then advanced in a great rage  enquired of me my name, upon
telling him that I did not want to give it  he struck me with his cane. Here my
dear mother, I could scarce restrain myself so far as to keep from knocking him
down, but regarding his gray hairs I instantly demanded his motive for attacking
my person, He  abused me with language that would have disgraced a jockey and
said that he had his brains nearly knocked out and again asked my name. By this
time my blood was warm and retiring a few paces back, positively refused to give
it. Upon this seizing me with the assistance of Mr. V., they  forcibly carried
me into the antechamber where the latter discovered my  name. Never had my
feelings been so severely wounded. Struck and abused  without the means of
redress and on the verge of being suspended or  perhaps expelled.

​	The next morning Palmer told his side  of the story to the faculty,
which got him suspended. Since he had been  only peripherally involved, and had
not informed on the other students  involved (even to his mother), his
classmates petitioned for a lifting  of Palmer's suspension, which was granted.
Remarkably, this story, which is hardly mentioned in the faculty minutes, did
not simply end with  Palmer's reinstatement. Cooper, by caning him, had insulted
young  Palmer's honor, so the punctilious student informed his mother without
apologies that he had sent Cooper a challenge.

​	I have demanded  satisfaction of Dr. Cooper for striking me, but he
refuses to give any. I threatened to prosecute him for damages and also to carry
him before  the Board of  Trustees for redress. With regard to the former means
I  shall wait on your advice, but the faculty have already determined that  the
case shall be brought before the Trustees. Satisfaction of some kind I must
have."

​	The eighteen year old Palmer had to have  satisfaction of the sixty-six
year old Cooper, and he proposed to get it in a duel. The wound on his head
healed, but the injury to his honor  did not. Cooper declined his challenge, but
Palmer pressed his demand  for "satisfaction" through the code or through the
courts.  A blow with a cane and a refusal to duel indicated that the opponent
did not regard  the man caned as a gentleman. Palmer, who was otherwise a quiet,
studious young man who had never been in trouble before, felt compelled  to
challenge Cooper, even though dueling, much less dueling with the  president of
the College, was grounds for expulsion. He was driven to  this extremity by the
power of public opinion, and the importance of an  honorable reputation. In
Palmer's petition to the faculty for the  removal of his suspension, he stated
that while he was very grieved at  the prospect of being denied his degree, he
was even more worried about  his reputation.

​	But it is not only the loss of my education that distresses me,
something dearer still weighs upon my head. Should I be  compelled to return
home under the explicit sentence of the faculty, my  offence, exaggerated as it
has already been, and will yet be, must  inevitably carry with it the appearance
of heinousness which can not  fail to stagger the good opinion of my friends and
acquaintances. They  will I fear, be inclined to believe that my previous
conduct has been  one of deceit. Remember gentlemen, how sacred and how tender
is  reputation--like the brittle glass once shattered it can never more be
repaired.

​	Failure to resent publicly a caning revoked a man's  claim to the title
of gentleman. It was a permanent dishonor. Dueling  was an essential ritual in a
society as morbidly sensitive to status and reputation as antebellum South
Carolina. Moreover dueling served as a  signal of political availability, so it
reinforced the intimate  connection between personal honor with public virtue.
Like almost all of the students of the College, Palmer was an advocate of the
code duello. In another letter Palmer wrote his mother: “If the practice of
dueling  continues to spread as it has lately, the ends to which it has hitherto
been subservient will inevitably be perverted. However inhuman and  repugnant it
may appear to the rules of civil society, nevertheless  dueling in my opinion
has been and still is now its necessary  concomitant.”

At least two challenges between students were  recorded in the faculty minutes
but this is only a fraction of the true  total.  In 1834, one alumnus observed,
"The frequency of challenges and  duels amongst the students is very injurious
to the College. I am  informed that there have been two challenges to fight
duels amongst the  students within a few weeks past."  Neither of these is
mentioned in the faculty minutes or extant local newspapers. Every student on
campus  either had a pair of dueling pistols or knew where a set could be
quickly obtained. The only duel between undergraduates that resulted in
fatalities was fought in 1833 between juniors A. Govan Roach and James  G. Adams

Both men were of fine families, and ... they were very  intimate friends; they
sat opposite each other in the Steward's hall at  table. When the bell rang and
the door was opened, the students rushed  in, and it was considered a matter of
honor, when a man got hold of a  dish of butter or bread, or any other dish, it
was his. Unfortunately,  Roach and Adams sat opposite each other, and both
caught hold of a dish  of trout at the same moment. Adams did not let go; Roach
held onto the  dish. Presently Roach let go of the dish and glared fiercely in
Adams  face, and said, "Sir, I will see you after supper." They sat there all
through supper, both looking like mad bulls I presume. Roach left the  supper
room first, and Adams immediately followed him. Roach waited  outside the door
for Adams. There were no hard words and no fisticuffs-  all was dignity and
solemnity. "Sir," said Roach, "What can I do to  insult you?" Adams replied
"This is enough, sir, and you will hear from  me."

The triviality of this encounter as the grounds for a duel  suggests a morbid
sensitivity to slights that made no exceptions, even  for intimate friends. Also
the queer juxtaposition of icy formality and  boiling rage is remarkable: the
two friends sat through a meal intending to shoot each other, but when they met
later, no threats were made, no  punches thrown.

​	Adams went to his room and penned a challenge.  Roach immediately
accepted. They each chose students to assist them as  seconds in this affair of
honor, and a time and place was agreed upon.   It is not recorded which side
provided the matched set of dueling  pistols but help was also sought from
outside the College. Perhaps  calling upon family connections, each of the young
men assembled an  entourage of gentlemen (who were apparently experienced
duelists) from  the town of Columbia. Revealingly, the narrator of this story,
Marion  Sims (‘32) described this, rather than the two teenagers shooting each
other over the issue of who had the trout first, as being "strange":

​	And now comes the strange part of this whole affair: no less a person
than General Pierce M. Butler, distinguished in the Mexican War as the  colonel
of the Palmetto regiment, and who became Governor of South  Carolina, agreed to
act as second for to one of the young men, the other had as his advisor, Mr. D.
J. McCord, a distinguished lawyer, a most  eminent citizen... Here were two of
the most prominent citizens of South Carolina, each about forty years of age,
aiding and abetting dueling  between two young men, neither of them over twenty
years of age.

Doctor "Josiah C. Nott (‘24), then of Columbia, and afterward of Mobile,
Alabama, was the surgeon...."  His services were called upon, but to no  avail.
Adams, hit in the pelvis,

"lingered a few hours and died  in great agony."  Roach was also hit and nearly
died from the wound, but survived in a wretched condition; "after weeks and
months of suffering, he was able to get up, but he was lame for life."  The
psychological  consequences of killing a close friend were too much for Roach,
who  drank himself to death within two years of his "recovery." Roach was, of
course, expelled, as were the two other students who assisted the  principals.

​	The College fostered a pathological hypertrophy of  “thymos”. The
issuing and accepting of a challenge by close friends for  such an insignificant
dispute can be largely attributed to the  hypersensitivity towards disrespect
which South Carolinian society in  general and the College in specific
inculcated in easily provoked young  men. It is less obvious why, after their
initial fury had subsided,  these two students (who had an evening to think it
over) could not,  through the mediation of their friends, make an honorable
peace. The  rules of dueling required that seconds know the circumstances
leading to a duel, and attempt to reconcile the two parties.  Moreover, the
behavior of the gentlemen who advised the students was strange, even by  the
nineteenth- century standards of the narrator. Although better  judgment might
have been expected from men of mature years, the older  men did not broker an
honorable reconciliation. As one historian has  noted, "In this culture,
students at South Carolina College quickly  learned, self assertiveness was so
valued that no challenge could be  dismissed as trivial." The Roach-Adams duel
was not entirely an anomaly, either in or out of the College.  Congressman W.W.
Boyce (’36?) was  wounded in his first duel at the age of sixteen, and he dueled
a second  time at nineteen.  The code of dueling published by a former Governor
of South Carolina contained provisions for challenges by minors.  Most of  the
highly regarded gentlemen of South Carolina, particularly those who  were
affiliated with the College, lived and died  by the laws of honor.  No teacher
or classroom can compete with the power of example. When the events in society
at large reinforce educational institutions, as was  the case with elite
violence in South Carolina, the combination is  particularly potent. Violence
was an important mode of self expression  for South Carolina's males, a central
element in their personal  identity. Many of the state's most influential
figures publicly  cultivated a pose of genteel defiance that blurred the
distinction  between public and private life. The students learned that a known
propensity toward violence was something of an advantage in the rough  and
tumble world of South Carolinian politics. Consider the following  case from the
career of James H. Irby (’17) who became a prominent  lawyer and politician:

​	Colonel Irby was sitting with some lawyers after the adjournment of
court playing a game of whist. The Colonel  made an offensive remark about the
testimony of one of the surveyors in a land case which he had before the court
that day. One of the lawyers  told him that the surveyor alluded to was his
uncle. Colonel Irby  immediately apologized, and said he did not know of the
relationship or  he would not have made the remark. This emboldened the lawyer
to make  further comment on the remark, to which the Colonel replied again
apologetically. But the more he apologized, the more resentful became  the
lawyer.

​	The formalities here are noteworthy. Colonel Irby  had apologized for
making the remark, not for the content. This  statement is a less than
satisfactory apology, and an implied public  insult to the lawyer and his uncle.
The lawyer became heated and  required more of an apology, but Irby's own honor
was on the line.  Colonel Irby could not admit that he impugned a man's
integrity without  cause, so the exchange became progressively uglier. The
lawyer continued to press for a concession of his uncle's integrity, Irby dodged
politely until threats replaced retractions. “At length Colonel Irby  became
excited. "I have done all I could do to appease you, and inasmuch as you refuse
to accept my apologies, I now say your uncle is a damned  old rascal, and I
believe he swore a lie in the case- help yourself."  This seemed to reconcile
the indignant kinsman.”  "Help yourself" was an invitation to deadly force.
Regardless of the Byzantine rituals of  etiquette and the exquisite veneer of
courtesy, violence and the threat  of violence were fundamental elements in the
political culture of  antebellum South Carolina. In this case Colonel Irby ended
his dispute  with the lawyer by an implied appeal to the code. Alumni who
developed a reputation for violently defending their honor were well prepared
for  public life, because they were the only men who could threaten people as
convincingly as Colonel Irby did. Colonel Irby (’17) was an honorable  man and
an influential planter; it is not surprising that he was  eventually elected
Lieutenant Governor of South Carolina. He was, after  all, a man who helped
other people help themselves.

​	Dr. Marion  Sims (’32) noted that "... duels generally were between
young and  unmarried men."  Dueling seems mostly to have been practiced by
ambitious young gentlemen who would have denied being ambitious, and who wished,
among other things, to call public attention to themselves in a dangerous ritual
which validated their status.   Young men were limited in their choice of
dueling partners. Alumni William C. Preston (‘12)  and Waddy Thompson (‘14) were
prominent politicians who accepted the  code, but accepting the code did not
mean accepting a challenge from any "whipster." In 1834 Preston wrote Thompson,

I fully concur with  Butler as to the propriety of your declining a personal
controversy with young Mr. Yancey. The difference in your age and condition
renders it  impossible. If men who have sustained a long active and important
part  in political controversies are to be pistoled off by every whipster who
may choose to seek the notoriety of abusing them in the newspaper, there is an
end to all safety--and what is of more importance of all equality in political
responsibility.... I understand that Mr. Yancey is a mere  youth. Now if you had
insulted, that would have ruined his youth and  entitled him to a reparation.
But he has no right to make a fight with  you for his own gratification.

​	The young “whipsters” of the  College, particularly the fraction of each
class that were incorrigible  hellions, sometimes gratified their desire for a
fight collectively  rather than individually, taking on the steward or the
Marshall or the  townspeople or the faculty or the state militia. The students
who  attended the College together were easily excited and had powerful group
loyalties, which sometimes overcame the better judgement of the level  headed,
much less the wild ones. Mob actions and riotous assemblies  could be gotten up
among the undergraduates on the flimsiest of  pretexts.

​	The first of the great student disturbances was the  "drunken maniac
riot" of February 1814.  This "serious and disgraceful  tumult" involved
firearms and liquor and nearly every student on campus, but it only lasted a day
or two, and the militia did finally restore  order.  At the center of these
proceedings was the old fashioned and  cantankerous professor of mathematics and
astronomy, George Blackburn.  Blackburn was insensitive to certain pedagogical
and political insights  which were obvious to other professors, and consequently
he was  insufficiently deferential to his students.

​	When he began teaching in 1811, he found that

​	... [T]he real condition of the College was still worse than it
appeared at the first view. My classes knew nothing--the seniors in  particular,
not even the common Arithmetic, Algebra and Geometry: yet  such a class thus
wholly unprepared, I was directed to carry through a  course in mechanical
philosophy. I argued and expostulated, but all in  vain; at length in despair I
appealed to the class, and desired them to  inform me how they wished me to
proceed--After some time they gave me to understand, that they wanted to learn
[natural] philosophy without  mathematics.

Blackburn stubbornly persisted in teaching  mathematics, despite the fact that
the students had expressed their  feelings quite clearly.  This curmudgeon
compounded his mistakes when he stigmatized several of these scholars by
bringing them before the  faculty, "... by whom they were degraded or put upon
conditional  standing."  Despite the fact that he was relentlessly pushing these
undergraduates beyond the limits of honorable endurance, he tactlessly
expressed surprise that "this step which ought to have been received as  proof
of my zeal and fidelity, and to have gained me the approbation of  sensible men,
was cunningly urged against me as a crime, and ascribed to the harshness and
severity of my manner."

​	Many of the  undergraduates were amateur lawyers, and under the pressure
of such  harshness and severity, profound legal reasoning was devoted to
honorably shutting the College down. It was noted by some prospective  member of
the bar that the students were legally bound to answer in the  mornings a bell,
the official College bell, and no other. This train of  thought was a matter of
some anxiety to the faculty, so they  suspiciously inspected the students' rooms
at about ten o'clock on the  evening of February eighth. No gunshots were heard,
no brawling  observed; all was quiet. They found the dormitories serene and
decorous, with conscientious, sober students in orderly rooms. Alarmed, the
faculty resolved to meet again at midnight. At that time the faculty  caught
several students in the act of stealing the bell. According to  Blackburn:

​	The next morning the two students, whom we had  detected in the bell
loft, made a rude knocking at my door, one of them  having, as I was informed, a
loaded pistol in his bosom; I ordered them  into my study and demanded their
business; when in a course[sic] and  indecent manner, they told me they came for
their ropes, which we had  taken from the bell; being informed that their ropes
should be sent to  them by a servant they retired muttering menaces. Soon
afterwards the  students began to assemble in the College yard, and to manifest
a  disposition to tumult and disorder; on my passing through them I was  saluted
with threats and imprecations; I turned to them and said  "gentlemen you know
where all this will end, the faculty will be  obeyed." The son of General
C------, then shook his cudgel at me, using  oaths, and gross expression of
threat and insult, and added "the worst  we can suffer is expulsion, and of that
we are certain already."

​	In light of these portentous activities, president Maxcy resorted to
strong measures. At prayers that evening, he gave them "a very serious  and
impressive admonition."  Heedless of Maxcy's good advice, "just  after the
ringing of the seven o'clock bell, a number of students broke  out into open and
formidable rebellion."  The boys had waited for food  and nightfall. What
happened next appears to have been a carefully  planned conspiracy to riot. The
students donned disguises, drank  heavily, then posted guards at the doors of
professors' houses to  prevent their exit. Blackburn was burned in effigy, the
bell was  destroyed, faculty houses were stoned. Someone sent for the Trustees.

​	One of the Trustees residing in town was the Governor, who called upon
the local authorities to restore order. President Maxcy hid indoors in  his
house on campus during the entire evening, and took no part in  quelling the
riot. As "Old Jock" later explained to the Trustees, he  didn't "have the nerves
for it."  Apparently the "serious and impressive admonition" he had given
earlier, besides exposing the limitations of  his rhetoric, had also exhausted
his disciplinary capacities. The  outnumbered civil authorities reported that
they were unable to quell  the riot, and the Governor then had no alternative
but to call out the  militia. The faculty reported that after the arrival of the
militia,  "some resistance was attempted," and that "after all personal
opposition had ceased much grossly abusive language was used for some time by
some of the students and that it was found necessary to keep a strong guard  in
one of the professors houses during the whole night."

​	The  next morning the militia was visited by a "deputation from the
insurgents, who promised submission to the laws," which ended the  violence.
Blackburn swore out a complaint for assault against two of the rioters, "... yet
so completely had a few disorderly boys subdued  Columbia that the constables
refused to execute the warrants."   Eventually the warrants were served, and one
of the two was apprehended. In the aftermath of this affair the search for a
scapegoat began in  earnest. At least eight students were suspended and later
expelled. The  Trustees asked the civil authorities that the criminal charges be
dropped, and since the Trustees were among the most powerful politicians in the
state, their request was granted. The waspish Blackburn blamed  the Trustees for
excessive leniency, especially in dealing with the sons of influential
politicians. The Trustees returned the favor, by blaming the riot on Blackburn
and suggesting it was caused by his lack of  sensitivity and demanding ways.
Disgusted, Blackburn tendered his  resignation.

​	 Looking back on his days under Maxcy, William  Grayson (’09) asserted
that "If its alumni succeed in life, they succeed not in consequence of College
influences, but in spite of them."  Given events like the riot of 1814, it would
be easy to assume that he was  right. Yet it is a remarkable fact that often
even the most ungovernable of students developed an interest in government later
in life, and  these alumni were conspicuously successful politicians. The
students  involved in this riot are a case in point. Since it is believed that
with one possible exception, all of the students on campus were  involved, it is
easy to pierce the disguises, to place the "faces in the crowd."  Over one
hundred forty young men were involved in the riot,  but only eight were
expelled. Thomas Cuthbert, who had informed  Professor Blackburn that "the worst
we can suffer is expulsion," was  right. He was expelled, but he did escape
prosecution for the half dozen or so felonies committed during the riot. Other
campus rebels who  participated but avoided collegiate discipline included
Fountain Winston (‘15), who became Lieutenant Governor of Mississippi; Charles
McDonald  (’16), who became Governor of Georgia; and Waddy Thompson (‘14), who
represented South Carolina in Congress. Rebellious from the beginning,  Richard
F. Simpson (‘16), David Lewis Wardlaw (‘16), and Daniel Dupre  (‘14) were
signers of South Carolina's Ordinance of Secession. Henry  Junius Nott (‘14)
became a professor at the College, and David J. McCord (‘14) was an editor of
the eight-volume Statutes at Large of South  Carolina.

​	In 1834 in the wake of Cooper's removal, one critic  reported to the
Trustees that the reasons for the decline of support for the College was due to
a general opinion:

​	Of the bad government  of the College and the worse habits of the
students. The opinion is  general that the students are apt to imbibe sentiments
of infidelity,  are grossly immoral in their habits, in every vice such as
intemperance, gambling, lewdness, etc.... The opinion in general is that the
students do as they please. That instead of the faculty governing them, they
govern the faculty.

Dargan exaggerated. The students policed  themselves (for certain infractions)
with great success, and Cooper  maintained discipline sporadically. Yet the
students of the Cooper era  were even more unruly than those before. In a letter
to Thomas  Jefferson, Cooper described College rebellions as an "annual" event.
Although it was never necessary for him to call out the militia as in  1814, the
description Cooper gave in 1822 of one of his "annual"  rebellions sounds rather
similar:

​	... [T]hey were guilty the next night of every outrage they had the
power to commit. The professors  were threatened, pistols were snapped at them;
guns fired near them,  Col. John Taylor (formerly of the Senate from this place)
was in company with myself burnt in effigy: the windows of my bedroom have been
repeatedly shattered at various hours of the night and guns fired under  my
window. If we were to ask any young man who did so he would feel  insulted at
the question, and deem his honor injured by being asked if  he knew the
perpetrator of a crime, altho' he stood near the offender at the time. Of the
junior class, we have suspended about 20, and reported for expulsion 4 or 5
others.

​	Often student rebellions were  triggered by the unwholesome meals served
in Commons. The food served by the Steward was often unpalatable, and the
students were not reluctant  to take matters into their own hands. In 1823,
Cooper reported to the  Trustees the "usual annual disturbance on account of
Commons." He noted  that "the Steward's house was broken open, his knives,
forks, plates,  dishes, etc. collected and thrown down the well. The principal
offender  is known, but the personal safety of the informant is at stake; and
the  enquiry cannot be prosecuted."  The informant was probably a slave. The
students seem to have established and maintained their considerable  latitude
for misbehavior through violence and the threat of violence.  This is perhaps
why Cooper told the Trustees "... here the faculty dare  not act on the
concurrent testimony of any number of negroes, who may be actual witnesses to
the offense."

​	Cooper never succeeded in  imposing more than a fitful and uncertain
peace on the College, and the  students misbehavior inevitably exacerbated his
critics' disapproval.  Cooper insisted to the Trustees that the fault was not
his. "If any  misconduct takes place in the College it is next to impossible to
discover the offender.... [T]here is absolutely no means whatever of  preserving
order and regularity in the College than appeals to the good  sense and good
feelings of the students....  Since the undergraduates  were not remarkable for
their good sense, and the era of good feelings  was over, the misbehavior of the
young men grew progressively worse.

​	One of his former students thought the responsibility for the weak
discipline was Cooper's. "He was an entire stranger to Southern society  and he
knew nothing of the peculiarities of Southern youth."  This was  also true of
Maxcy, but unlike Cooper,  Maxcy was a Federalist whose  opinions and principles
meshed easily with those that were expected of  the young gentlemen he taught.
Compared with Maxcy, it was alleged that  Cooper's clumsy blustering made for
weak discipline:

... [H]e had  to govern Southern youth. Whether for better or worse, they have
their  peculiarities, which spring from the manners, customs and institutions
of the country. In certain particulars he erred grievously in his  estimate....
Dr. Maxcy, as Dr. Henry tells us in his eulogy, judged  differently. He saw in
Southern youth a conviction of independence and a disposition to assert and
exercise it. He did not attempt to extirpate  this elevated principle, but to
modify it. He appealed to the honor of  his pupils, and with generous minds the
appeal was always powerful, and  generally successful. If there be any among us
who object to this- let  them abolish the institution of slavery; for that
spirit is born of it.

​	Like their fathers, the students were imbued with a particularly
powerful esprit d'corps. One observer made an analogy between the group
loyalties of the College alumni and the Jesuits. “Every student--every  past
graduate of the College- seems to be imbued with the same  intolerant spirit...
Each seems to have the vows of the Order upon him-  as mystically binding as
those of Loyola upon the devotees of the Order  of Jesus.”  This analogy was
apt. The students, like their fathers,  brothers, and uncles were a
self-conscious intellectual elite imbued  with a militant spirit which made them
a law unto themselves. As the  political climate in the state grew stormier in
the 1850s, there was a  corresponding increase in the number and severity of
student  combinations, riots and disturbances.

​	In 1850, during a brief  absence by Professor Thornwell (’31), Professor
Brumby (’24) informed  the junior class that the chemistry recitations would be
doubled up on  two of Thornwell's days. The students had nicknamed Brumby "Old
Fossil," and they were not fond of science. Brumby was angered, and he censured
their conduct as childish and disorderly, demanding attendance at the
recitations. The junior class formed a "combination" and refused to  attend.
Alarmed at this insubordination, President Preston met with  members of the
junior class, and asked their reasons for the boycott.  The young men had been
sharpening their legal skills, and the spokesmen  for the class informed him
that they had agreed not to attend the  recitations for the following reasons:

​	1st, That the order for  attending Dr. Brumby's recitation was not
legal, inasmuch as a Professor had not a constitutional right to make such an
order.

​	2nd, That  Dr. Brumby had used offensive language and in a harsh
manner--for which  an apology was due before they would attend his recitation.

The casuistry of constitutional obstructionism was of great interest to  these
sensitive young men, perhaps because their elders had shown it to  be a vehicle
of political distinction. Preston remonstrated with them,  "Old Fossil" actually
apologized, nonetheless all but a handful of the  students still refused to
attend class. The faculty had no choice but to suspend the rebels. One student
immortalized the anti chemistry  combination in a bit of doggerel

​	No proud professor's sternness, nor

​	A dotage rasher still,

​	shall curb while Southern air we breathe

​	Our independent will.

​	'tis thus we part:- emotions deep

​	Within our bosoms swell;

​	For sorrows damp our spirits chill

​	as we repeat farewell.

​	When the decision of the faculty became known, a mob of students arose
to celebrate an unanticipated rite of spring, "the death and burial of
chemistry." Preston found out after the fact that this apparently  spontaneous
funeral for the hard sciences was in fact elaborately  choreographed. “The
proceedings of the evening were set forth in a  regular written programme, which
was subsequently carried out. The  assembly to meet--books to be piled up and
burnt- a satirical song to be sung on the Chemical professor--the death and
burial of chemistry- to  be fully enacted with liquor and firecrackers.”

​	Preston vividly described his unavailing attempt to bring the students
back into order:

​	I witnessed a scene of confusion, uproar and turbulence, beyond what I
had ever seen. There was a general confusion of clamorous voices,  directed at
no particular subject. The whole College was apparently  assembled--many very
drunk, all frantic; no marked prevalence of evil  passion, though a prodigious
display of tumultuary excitement--one boy  was brandishing a sword, but with no
indication of murderous  intent--though its flashing in the light of the blazing
fire looked  fearful enough. The fire was consuming a table covered with a pile
of  books-- the Chemical Text Books, which the members of the junior class  had
devoted as a solemn sacrifice to the flames. I walked into the midst of the
crowd, ordering them to return to their rooms- the crowd receded before me for a
while--offered me no insult or indignity that I knew  of, though I have since
been told that a brick bat was thrown at me- and I heard a boy say, in a low
voice to his companion, "You had best put  up that pistol." After being in the
crowd until it was perfectly clear  that the reins of authority were broken, and
that a temper existed  beyond the possibility of control, I felt that my vain
official  authority would only be degraded and cheapened by a further effort,
and I therefore returned home.

The "reins of authority" were galling  to the students of the College, and while
the "death and burial of  chemistry" was a unique celebration, several other
combinations,  rebellions, and riotous assemblies were ignited by the flamboyant
students of the 1850s.

​	The two hundred or so young rebels who  celebrated the death and burial
of chemistry in 1850 were intimately  connected with the demise of the Union ten
years later. These young men  who rebelled together in College in many cases
rebelled together in the  Civil War. Six Confederate Generals (Elliott, Gist,
Bratton, Chalmers,  Gary, and Wharton), not to mention scores of lower ranking
officers,  were assembled for these festivities. One student, William Chaney,
who  was only on campus for the 1850 academic year, remembered that
"Confederate Generals S. R. Gist, John A. Wharton, and James R.  Chalmers, were
contemporaries of mine at the South Carolina College, and we were closely
associated with each other all through the War...."   Moreover, he remarked,
"Chalmers, Wharton, and Gist all received what  they knew of military tactics
from their connection with our old South  Carolina College Cadets, in those days
acknowledged to be the best  drilled company in the state."

​	The young men who burned the  chemistry texts became politicians as well
as soldiers. Three future  Congressmen, (Chalmers, Richardson, and Williams)
were among the  participants of the riot.  In addition, five of the young men
became  members of Secession Conventions elsewhere in the South. William C.
Scott (‘50) helped Virginia secede, George Williamson (’50) was a member of the
Louisiana Secession Convention, and John Wharton (’50) was a  member of the
Texas Secession Convention. Two prominent members of the  Mississippi Secession
Convention, James R. Chalmers (’51) and T. C.  Bookter (’50), were also
implicated in what president Preston called  breaking "the reins of authority."

​	The next riot, the “Great  Biscuit Rebellion of 1852” was the largest of
the antebellum  disturbances. The students, again dissatisfied with the food in
commons  formed a combination and circulated a petition to have the Commons
abolished. But the Trustees refused and one professor noted in his  diary:

The students animated by the revolutionary spirit so lately rampant in this
state, entered into a solemn covenant not to board in  commons. The Trustees
have declined abolishing the Hall. What will be  the consequence? I see no other
than that these young specimens of  Carolina spirit, chivalry and independence
will go home to repent at  leisure  their folly and rashness- and perhaps to
make the folly of  their conduct complete- come back. I hope they will stay at
home. It is  time to settle the discipline of this college upon the principle
that  the trustees and the faculty are the governors and the students are the
governed. At present the students insist upon the Supremacy.

​	The students failed achieve supremacy, and one hundred eight
undergraduates, most of the student body, were expelled. Among this  group were
many figures, such as Martin Witherspoon Gary, (’52) who  would play prominent
roles in first in the Civil War and later in  resisting Reconstruction and
establishing white supremacy in 1876.   Virtually all of the one hundred and
eight “Biscuit Rebels” served as  officers in the Confederate army. “Animated by
the rebellious spirit so  lately rampant the state”, the students were growing
more progressively  rebellious in a climate of opinion ever more favorable to
rebellion. To  their great displeasure, president McCay and the residents of
Columbia  found this out in the Guard House Riot of February 17-18, 1857.

​	 The leading figures in the Guard House Riot were the Town Marshall J.
D. Burdell, who was a notorious bully, and four especially intractable
students, Edward Niles (’56), John C. McClenahan (’56), and two cousins, John
Taylor Rhett (’56) and Albert Moore Rhett (’56). McClenahan and  John Rhett were
close friends and comrades in arms, who had been  suspended and reported to the
Trustees for expulsion in 1854 because the faculty found out that they intended
to duel with each other.   Apparently these high-spirited young men were popular
with their  classmates, because the students petitioned to have them readmitted
on  the rather flimsy grounds that they had reconciled their differences. Of
course, "Rhett" was a surname to be reckoned with in South Carolina,  and it was
prudent to avoid bad feeling among Rhett's relations and bad  press in the
Mercury, which was controlled by the Rhett family.  The  faculty, who often
compounded the difficulty of keeping order on campus  by not enforcing the rules
equally, favoring students with influential  relatives, agreed to readmit the
would-be duelists.  Rhett and  McClenahan, now fast friends, were restored to
College.

​	The  "Guard House Riot" began on the evening of February 18, 1856, when
Edward Niles and two of his friends from College went into town in  search of
liquid refreshments. "Niles had been drinking ale excessively  and was quite
intoxicated," McCay explained to the Trustees.  Niles  punched the town marshal,
Burdell, in the chest. Burdell replied by  knocking him cold with a nightstick.
Niles' friends, who were probably  as drunk as Niles himself, attempted to help.
One ran for a doctor, and  the other tried to revive the unconscious young man.

​	As it  appeared that Niles was badly hurt, the police gathered around
him while his friend managed to get him off the pavement and on his feet. Niles,
groggily returning to consciousness, opened his eyes to find marshals  all
around. The confused young man flailed his arms around, swinging at  everyone,
hitting "one or two of the marshals. On account of this they  determined to put
him in the guard House...."  Niles' drinking companion raced back to the College
and told this tale to his fellows. The  students were outraged by this state of
affairs, because Niles was one  of their own and because "... it [was] not
customary to lock up people  of respectable connexions [sic] within its [the
Guard House] walls."  In only a few moments, the battle cry "College!" was sent
up, and the  entire student body, most of whom probably received only a garbled
and  excessively bloody account of the fray, marched on the Guard House. As
McCay explained, the students "did not indeed ask for his liberty but  demanded
it and it was obtained."

​	The members of the faculty,  alarmed at the cry "College!" hurried to
the Guard House, but they were  too slow, and only met students returning with
the injured Niles. Rhett  and McClenahan, the hotheads who had nearly dueled two
years previously, led a charge of students back to the Guard House, so they
could obtain  "satisfaction" from Burdell. Of course, they could not demand a
gentleman's satisfaction, because Burdell was no gentleman. They  intended to
whip him. McCay reported "... as the students were marching  back to College
after their triumphant liberation of Niles, finding that he was very badly
perhaps dangerously wounded; and being indignant at  the brutal treatment he had
received, someone made the proposition to go back and give Burdell a whipping."

​	The students charged the  Guard House to the cry "College!" In the
presence of the Mayor and  president McCay, a mob of students armed with clubs
forced their way  inside and a spectacular brawl with citizens and marshals
erupted.  McClenahan and Rhett actually reached Burdell and clubbed him severely
before half a dozen marshals returned the favor. All three hit the  floor,
bloody and unconscious. The ineffectual McCay tried to get the  students to
stop. The Mayor called out the militia and the alarm bells  were rung all over
town. At the sound of the bells, "some of the  students ran down to the library
where the arms for the College cadets  were deposited and being refused the key
... broke open the door and  took possession of the company's rifles."  The
armed students carried  these weapons uptown, but they met only returning
students, who  persuaded them to return to campus. The agitated undergraduates
slept  with their weapons that night.

​	During the tense evening,  McClenahan (’56) and Albert Moore Rhett
(’56), cousin of the injured  John Taylor Rhett (’56), agreed that honor
demanded that Burdell be  severely chastised. They "agreed privately among
themselves ... to renew the attack upon Burdell," if upon investigation it
turned out that he  had not been severely wounded.  The next morning, McCay
proposed  arbitration and this was nearly accepted, but the students' oratorical
abilities got the better of them. The Rhetts and McClenahan (with his  head
dramatically bandaged) made impassioned speeches demanding that  this
dishonorable compromise be rejected. As one alumnus remembered, "a  point of
honor was involved, a casus belli given, and that was enough in those chivalrous
days."  McCay went to consult with the faculty, but  their deliberations were
interrupted by the sound of the alarm bell.   The militia had been called out
again.

​	True to their prior  agreement, Albert Rhett and the wounded McClenahan
went into town  immediately after the meeting of students with weapons in order
to  settle their score with Burdell. "Rhett had a short club eighteen or  twenty
inches long and 3 or 4 in[ches] circumference. McClenahan had  what is called a
"Billy" consisting of two small heavy metal balls  united with an elastic
whalebone or rattan, on which was a handle to  hold by."  They attacked the
lightly wounded Burdell on the street with  gentlemanly instruments that would
today be called a nightstick and a  blackjack. Other marshals joined in the
brawl, the alarm bell was rung  wildly, and the militia assembled. On campus,
the students, alerted by  the bell, grabbed rifles and pistols and whatever
other weapons were  handy and ran uptown in a body. Two hundred armed militiamen
squared off with over one hundred enraged undergraduates. As one townsman noted
in  his diary, "the students armed with everything from a revolver to a half
brickbat stood there[sic] ground, daring the militia to fire, heaping  every
insult upon them...."  When the faculty arrived, the two sides  were on the
brink of shooting it out.

​	Someone had the presence of mind to appraise the former president of the
College, Rev. Thornwell  (‘31), of the situation. The minister rushed to the
scene, and standing  in the line of fire between the two sides he addressed a
rousing speech  to the students. He appealed to the students' esprit d'corps,
eloquently suggesting that they return to campus for consideration of their
grievances. The charismatic Thornwell vigorously assured them that if  after
honorable deliberation, they had no better alternative than to  combat the
townsmen, they could return and he would lead them into  battle himself. With a
roar of "College!" the plucky minister stormed  back to campus, and the students
enthusiastically followed him.  Bloodshed was averted, and James Henly
Thornwell, pride of the  Euphradian society, had his finest hour.

​	Thornwell was the only  person to emerge from the Guard House Riot with
his reputation  unscathed. Burdell, the Marshall, got little sympathy because of
his  temperamental inclination towards the excessive use of force. One  student
recalled that "All the best citizens of Columbia as a matter of  course
sympathized with the students for many were graduates of the  College, and
detested the element of which Burdell was a fair  representative."  On the other
hand, the students did manage to renew  their established reputation for being
violent and easily provoked.

​	McCay had proven himself a dithering incompetent, and the  decision to
elevate him to the presidency of the College seemed, to say the least,
injudicious. McCay's critics demanded his resignation, and they harshly
criticized the Trustees for sustaining him.  The Governor was criticized for
allowing the students to keep arms on campus, the faculty was  chided for not
punishing misbehavior, and the students were reminded  that they were not above
the law.  One writer assigned blame to lax  College discipline;

​	... the students rule the officers of the  College who are afraid to
grow unpopular, lest they lose their place;  the students rule their parents, as
usual in such cases; the students  largely influence the Trustees, most of whom
have sons there; the  students have heretofore ruled triumphantly in the town of
Columbia....[T]he students live together on the College campus, form a  separate
community, and conscious of their power, and immunities and  impunities--their
heads of course must be turned--or they would be  something more than boys
heads--and hence the recent riots in Columbia.  That they have not occurred
oftener is the only wonder.

Another  observer made similar assertions about McCay's handling of discipline
at the College. "The terrible riot, which was the consummation of his  reign,
was not the ebullition of accidental contingencies, but a  necessary sequence of
long unrepressed series of riot and dissipation."

​	Reflecting on this debacle roughly a year later, a writer in the
Columbia Daily South Carolinian placed the blame for the Guard House  Riot in a
larger context. The chronic disciplinary problems were the  fault not so much of
specific individuals but on the upbringing and  education of South Carolina's
elite:

​	Since 1829, obedience has  ceased to be a virtue. Disobedience,
resistance to law and to authority, has so often been inculcated by great men
and editors, that it is not  wonderful that boys should have regarded it as
chivalric to be  disobedient. The South Carolina College has experienced this on
more  occasions than one.... [I]t was the mistaken opinion that it was
dishonorable to yield to the authorities, which led to this unfortunate
result.... [T]he difficulty in February '56, between the students and  the
police of the city, the breaking open the guard house to rescue a  student, the
array with arms in the streets of students against  citizens, and the late
resistance against president McCay's authority,  are to be set down to the fact
that the youth of the state are not  taught that "obedience is honor." Still
boys ought not to be blamed,  when legislators, politicians and editors, the
fathers and brothers of  students proclaim disobedience the law of chivalry and
honor.

The example set for the students by their male relatives, who were the most
influential men in South Carolina, convinced them that independence was
intransigence, and that the honorable was the intractable. Since the
Nullification crisis, an entire generation of ungovernable politicians,
constantly railing at the sordid impositions of a contemptible  authority, had
taught their sons and nephews and grandsons that  "submission" was a slavish
departure from their chivalric political  legacy. For a would-be South
Carolinian gentleman of the "old school,"  defiance was as much a reflex as a
decision. The college molded the  temperament, inculcated the mores and
articulated the doctrines that the alumni brought to political life. This highly
flammable combination was the staple of many fire-eaters.

​	One the best examples of the  sort of character sought after and
sometimes produced by the College is  James Henly Thornwell. His heroic behavior
and charismatic speech during the extreme danger of the Guard House Riot marked
the kind of “thymos”  that the founders intended to produce.  The students
responded to and  later emulated Thornwell’s courageous eloquence; many of them,
like Wade Hampton III (’36), were known during the Civil War for fearlessly
rallying their troops in pitched battles. Another alumnus, General  States
Rights Gist (’50) has horse shot out from under him while leading a charge at
Franklin, Tennessee in 1864. Undaunted, he got up, resumed  the charge on foot
and was killed.  His classmate, Peter Larey (’50)  served under Stonewall
Jackson and was wounded eleven times.  After  being shot ten times, only
“thymos” carries a man back into the fray for an eleventh bullet.

One of the professors at the college noted,

The students ... were very high spirited and honorable, but also quite
turbulent. They had been accustomed to being governed not so much by law as by
the personal influence and eloquence of Thornwell, the previous  president.
McCay was not popular--he was no speaker. Thornwell by his  personal magnetism
had created a very high sense of honor ... among the  students.

​	The students respected men of veracity, politeness,  learning, and
eloquence, but all such virtues were subordinate to  courage. Only a man who was
willing to fight and fight well could escape dishonor. Rev. Basil Manly (’21)
was one such man. He was the  valedictorian of the class of 1821, but his
achievement was marred by  the jealousy of a classmate who tried to kill him
with a knife.  The  assailant, John Campbell (’21) was expelled, but not before
Basil Manly  (’21), got a chance to display his personal courage before a very
appreciative audience. In his confrontation with Campbell, Manly  exemplified
the “thymos” expected of alumni.

A discomfited  competitor for the honor, giving way to vindictive and furious
passion,  went to the class meeting armed with a dirk, and endeavored to fix a
quarrel on young Manly. Failing in this, and more exasperated by a  coolness
that his violent words could not disturb, he rushed upon him  and endeavored to
plunge the deadly weapon into his breast. The blow was warded off, and before
the assailant knew what was going on he was  disarmed; and then it is said, a
fitting chastisement was inflicted by  the slender smooth faced preacher whose
laurels he had contested and  whose heart’s blood he would have shed…The fellow
sneaked off without  desiring to renew the contest and the boys threw up their
hats and said  it was the best fight that they ever saw a Baptist preacher make.

​	The ability to make a good fight and best a dangerous opponent was
essential to the character of an honorable gentleman. Piety, eloquence,
honesty, charity and the like

were acknowledged virtues but of  secondary importance. Honor demanded the
courage to face personal  danger. In Washington, alumni of the College, such as
Senator Louis T.  Wigfall ('37) of Texas, were seen as icons of "Southernness"
largely  because of their spiritedness and their reputation for violence. One
contemporary described Wigfall as "a good type of the man that the  institutions
of the [South] produce ... a remarkable man, noted for his  ready natural
eloquence; his exceeding ability as a quick, bitter  debater; the acerbity of
his taunts; and his readiness for personal  encounter."   Wigfall was notorious
for his violence in and out of  College.  Wigfall had been a bad tempered, hard
drinking student, and a  flamboyant disciplinary problem during his collegiate
years. After  graduation, he never went out in public without two loaded
pistols, and  people were generally very polite toward him. After a spectacular
series of duels with another notoriously violent alumnus, Congressman Preston
Brooks (‘39), Wigfall moved to Texas, practiced law, and became a  politician.
In 1859, he became fire-eating secessionist Senator Wigfall. Hypersensitive to
slights, always ready for violence, South Carolina  College alumni were the most
dangerous men in American politics.

​	The alumni acted collectively as they did individually and they rose to
leadership positions not merely in spite of their temperaments but also because
of them. In January, 1860, William Campbell Preston ('12),  former Senator from
South Carolina who had been also been president of  the College, wrote fellow
alumnus Louis Wigfall (’37):  "poor Pres  Brooks (’39), your old adversary, was
afterwards my friend when we were  colleagues together in Congress... life
tumbles us together very oddly,  and it seems to me as I jog on, that all the
good boys have gone out of  mind, while all the headlong ones, whose ruin was
speedily predicted,  are turning up as colonels, judges, and Senators.”  Senator
Wigfall was  unable to reply to his teacher's letter; he was occupied in
Congress  bringing Texas out of the Union.
