---
src: https://michaelsugrue.substack.com/p/a-book-i-never-published-354
---

Chapter Four:

The College in Antebellum South Carolinian Politics

“Knowledge is power.”

–Bacon, New Organon

“Who is Judge Munn?” wrote James Henry Hammond in a letter of December 1853.
Hammond (‘25) had read an article in the Charleston Mercury about the election
of Judge Munn by the legislature and was so surprised by this news that at first
he thought there must be some mistake. He wrote to a friend in shock and dismay:

I can’t find anybody who has heard of our new Judge though I have asked [more
than?] one Charleston lawyer concerning him. I thought for a long time it might
be a misprint. It may be some man of mark who like Rhett has recently changed
his name. Pray, is there such a man as Judge Munn in South Carolina? Enlighten
me. If there is, woe is me and woe are us in our midnight darkness into which
such lights shine but we see them not. Or can it be that South Carolina is
reduced to go out into highways to pick up any she can find to fill high office?

In antebellum South Carolina the political was the personal. Hammond (‘25) was
astonished at Judge Munn’s election because he knew, by direct acquaintance or
by reputation, every member of South Carolina’s political elite. In South
Carolina, most counties contained no more than a few dozen gentlemen (often
related by marriage) who had sufficient wealth, education and connections to
aspire to high office. There was literally no one in elite circles that Hammond
had not either met or at least heard about through mutual friends. The South
Carolinian political elite was numerically small, clubby, and, as Hammond
(himself an arriviste) knew, not easily entered. Eventually Hammond conceded
with consternation the existence of a judge he did not know, but this was an
exceptional case. Judge Munn had not attended the College.

Hammond (’25), had been an ideologically committed activist for the
self-determination of a distinctive cultural minority, slaveholding South
Carolinians, since the Nullification Crisis of the late 1820s. In Congress
during the late 1830s Hammond tried to precipitate secession even at the cost of
Civil War, and in the 1840s, after serving as Governor and causing a scandal, he
retired to his plantation to write proslavery propaganda. His long career
entailed a personal knowledge of the local notables in throughout the state,
and, like many of South Carolina’s politicians he habitually used his collegiate
connections in the conduct of public life. The most prominent men in the state,
such as Hammond, had a network of acquaintances among the gentry in each county
who could provide information, give speeches, write articles, and help thwart
political opposition. South Carolina College was the source of many of the
connections constituting these networks.

The pattern of officeholding in nineteenth century South Carolina reinforces
what contemporaries generally acknowledged; the College was the intellectual and
political crucible for South Carolina's political elite. The alumni were
conspicuous for their support of each other and their support of the College,
and through them the College wielded enormous influence on politics. Between
1824 and 1865, twelve of South Carolina's twenty-one governors were alumni.
After the war, alumni were elected Governor five more times. In every Congress
between 1824 and 1860, at least half of South Carolina’s congressional
delegation was composed of alumni. Between 1830 and the death of Calhoun in
1850, one of South Carolina's Senators was an alumnus; thereafter, one or more
were. The alumni in the legislature influenced legislation, policy, and
patronage by controlling the Speakership of the House and thus Committee
assignments. For thirty of the thirty-six years between 1824 and 1860, the
Speaker was an alumnus.

Between 1820 and 1860, at least a quarter of the members of the politically
dominant lower house were alumni, and an average of 32.5% of the state
legislature was composed of alumni. Moreover, the alumni legislators often
selected alumni to serve as Presidential Elector or State Judge or Trustee of
the College, not to mention less prominent local offices. It is not surprising
that complaints were voiced about the legislature becoming a preserve of College
graduates. The percentage of alumni in the state legislature increased steadily
until the mid 1830s, and then remained at roughly one third the total
legislature until the Civil War. The number of alumni in the legislature leveled
off after migration to the fertile newly opened lands of the Gulf States
intensified in the 1830s, particularly by those who opposed nullification and
thought civil war imminent. One writer noted that, in the wake of separatist
agitation a “disposition to marry and move off to the far West is exceedingly
prevalent among the lovers of union. The most circumspect and risk averse of
South Carolina’s elite found frontier conditions less daunting than a
confrontation with President Jackson.

Some men who later became prominent political figures, like the Congressman from
and later Governor of Mississippi, William McWillie (’17) and Congressman
Landrum (‘27) of Louisiana left South Carolina with their families rather than
take the Test Oath. In addition, a substantial minority of other alumni
nervously considered a move. In 1833 lowcountry lawyer J.L. Petigru (‘09) wrote
his college friend, Congressman James Dellett (‘10) of Alabama “… I believe a
great many of us will have to join you in Alabama before all this confusion is
ended. We don’t pretend however to foresee what’s coming to pass. Whether there
will be a civil war and whether such a war is to be carried on in the bosom of
the state is very doubtful.” The flight, beginning around 1830, of that portion
of the political elite with the most prudent and realistic understanding of
national politics contributed to the increasingly strident extremism within the
state. As a result those gentlemen who remained in the state became collectively
more intransigent. Petigru (‘09) wrote Dellett (’10). “If you were in S.C. you
would find very, very few of our set that are not willing to say to every man
who is against nullification, if you dislike to take our oath leave the state.
They say this to me- Harper (‘08), on whom I had some slight claims to
friendship, says it in his judicial opinion.”

The alumni who left the state influenced the politics of the lower South, but
their absence limited the size of the collegiate elite in the South Carolina
legislature. This partially explains the leveling off of the number of alumni in
the legislature after the mid 1830s. The College of Charleston began to get
greater funding from the city in the late 1830s and became a more serious
competitor. In the 1840s and 1850s added competition from the Citadel and newly
founded denominational colleges further checked the number of alumni in the
legislature. Without ever constituting a majority in the state legislature, the
alumni formed a self-conscious voting bloc which became particularly formidable
because the state had no organized political parties, leaving opposition
disorganized. To a great extent the College took up the institutional slack left
by the absence of a political party system.

Despite the fact that South Carolina had the least democratic political culture
in the antebellum United States, the dissatisfactions of the nonslaveholding
yeomen farmers could not always be conducted to the lightning rod of Yankee
abolitionism. In 1836 Professor Henry Junius Nott (’14) wrote apprehensively
that “It is often said, “We must separate.” “We must fight it out.” Be it so.”
But he noted South Carolina could neither separate nor fight without the support
of the nonslaveholding yeomen; “I have made up my mind fully on the matter and
believe all is lost.” Abolitionism, according to Nott (’14) was the political
analog of religious enthusiasm, and still more ominously, “the poor whites are
against us at home.” The problem of mobilizing the yeomanry in defense of
slavery and ultimately in support of secession was an ongoing struggle for South
Carolina’s elite. Some, like James Henry Hammond (’25) in his more sanguine
moments, were confident that the yeomen would fight for slavery, others were not
so sure. In 1860, on the eve of the Civil War, the president of the College,
Augustus Longstreet wrote secessionist propaganda explicitly designed to
convince nonslaveholding whites that they had an interest in joining the armed
struggle for independence. Two months before secession, President Longstreet
wrote a “Dialogue between a Northern Bostonian and a Southern Bostonian” which
he confidentially informed the editor of the Charleston Mercury was intended to
“do some good particularly with that class of people who are apt to think that
they have no interest in slaves & nothing to fear from abolition aggression.”

Planters dominated politics in South Carolina more than any other state and
yeomen had good grounds for disaffection. Among the bargains struck within South
Carolina’s constitution of 1808, (which remained in effect until Reconstruction)
was a power sharing agreement between the upcountry and the lowcountry and
between people and property. The lowcountry was given de facto control over the
Senate by means of malapportionment based on the traditional parishes. The Lower
House was apportioned into districts by white population and by the taxes paid.
This favored planters because they had most of the taxable wealth. Half of the
Lower House represented white people; the other half represented white people’s
property, which meant land and slaves regardless of locality.

During the 1830s many planters who opposed the tariff worried about the calling
of the Nullification Convention because such a convention of the people might
possibly alter the Constitution and reapportion the legislature. This
reapportionment did not occur until after the Civil War. Elite control was
reinforced still further as cotton plantations extended inland during the
nineteenth century. Antebellum South Carolina was the only state in the union in
which the legislature contained a majority of planters.

Unable to hold legislative office and saddled since the constitution of 1808
with a system of malapportioned rotten boroughs in the lowcountry, the yeomen
had interests that sometimes diverged from those of the planters, but they were
usually unable to articulate and act upon those differences. The yeomen did not
rise to political power until after 1890 on the basis of the Reconstruction
constitution of 1868 which reapportioned the state legislature. Ironically, the
document which gave former slaves the franchise made possible the rise of Ben
Tillman’s racist farmers movement.

Those yeomen that stayed in South Carolina occasionally sought state sponsored
primary and secondary education in preference to subsidies for the College, and
sometimes voiced objections to the collegiate elite, but they held no positions
in the legislature and had few influential leaders or sympathetic newspapers.
The alumni, on the other hand, were very sensitive to criticism and made
powerful use of the press. One candidate for the legislature in the upcountry
called South Carolina College an “aristocracy” and sought yeoman support by
announcing himself as a candidate in opposition to “the literary aristocracy”.
In a crushing riposte, the editor of the Charleston Mercury, himself an alumnus,
suggested in print that this might be the advent of “the illiterate candidate”
slyly boosting his rival. A system of free schools had been established by the
legislature in 1811, but it was a dismal failure. Apart from the College, the
state's educational system was wretched, and it was nearly impossible for those
outside the elite to obtain an education. As one irate critic noted, those
whites

... who have to work with their own hands ... [who comprise] the great mass of
the people are virtually disfranchised. What can a poor man do here? He can make
nothing to lay up for his family. He cannot get his children educated. He and
his family are doomed to poverty and ignorance, and to the contempt of the
favored aristocrat.

This was a particularly reasonable objection given that state supported primary
and secondary schools were virtually nonexistent. In some counties, expenditure
on education was less than one dollar per pupil. Moreover, very few pupils
attended. Only the children of the utterly indigent, widows or the disabled plus
orphans and illegitimate children were eligible for state subsidized education.
Public education bore the stigma of pauper education, so many children got no
education at all. Governor J.H. Adams summed up the antebellum school system in
his 1856 inauguration speech pronouncing the system a “failure.”

Even such a staunch supporter of the College as James Henly Thornwell (’31)
admitted that "No doubt there are many whose circumstances preclude them from
the first steps of a liberal education, and who, yet, have the capacity to
receive it, and who if educated, might reflect lasting honor upon the state.
Governor Hammond (‘25) stated directly in his message to the legislature in 1843
that the public schools in South Carolina were ineffective

The Free School System has failed. This fact has been announced by several of my
predecessors, and there is scarcely an intelligent person in the State, who
doubts that its benefits are perfectly insignificant in comparison with the
expenditure. Its failure is owing to the fact that it does not suit our people
or our government, and it can never be remedied. The paupers, for whose children
it is intended, but slightly appreciate the advantages of education; their pride
revolts at the idea of sending their children to school as "poor scholars," and
besides, they need them at home to work.

As might be expected under these circumstances, objections surfaced in
newspapers, particularly upcountry newspapers, which articulated the grievances
of the yeomanry. One upcountryman complained that

While other states pay five or six times the amount paid by South Carolina
towards the general education of the people, I presume it is a fact not
generally known, that she supports the College more liberally than any
institution of the kind is supported by any other State, especially where the
supporting fund is extracted from the pockets of the people by direct
taxation.... What are the benefits arising from this generosity? Does it enable
the aspiring youth, whose means are limited the better to accomplish his
education?

This critic answered his own rhetorical question in the negative, arguing
instead that the College was clearly a creation of and for the planters who
dominated state politics. The editor of the Columbia Daily South Carolinian also
acknowledged that "at present, comparatively few students alone profit by the
College, though every freeholder is taxed to sustain it." Another editor stated
it was common knowledge that South Carolina College had been established for the
sons of the wealthy. Another critic wrote, "I am opposed to South Carolina
College. I do not believe it right to collect money from the poor, to build,
endow or support Colleges, to educate rich men's sons. I do not wish to see
money taken from the people without distinction, and applied to the benefit of
one class, and the one best able to protect and support itself."

While most were agreed that the College had been a politically unifying force,
the exclusivity of the College and the hauteur of alumni was often criticized by
the unannointed. Within the state, funding was focused on South Carolina College
because it was an instrument of elite control. Higher education and the
advantages which attended it were generally reserved for planter’s sons. This
elite could afford private primary and secondary education, which was in
practice a precondition for admission to the College. Since South Carolina had
no public school system when the College was founded (and when a public school
system was established it was notoriously ineffective), the Greek and Latin
requirement effectively excluded from applying almost all young men whose
families could not afford private instruction. “A Teacher” in an 1855 letter
asked that classical knowledge, which could not be obtained by most boys in a
state that had virtually no primary or secondary education, not be a bar to
college admission, but to no avail. Thus the sons of South Carolina's
nonslaveholding yeoman farmers were generally excluded from access to the
College, and this was intended by the legislators who voted its funding. As
early as 1826, the faculty had candidly asked the legislature: “Ought the
community at the public expense to establish universities, or collegiate
institutions for the teaching of the higher branches of knowledge? ...
[B]ranches to which the poor cannot have access and of which in their probable
avocations in future life will have no need? We have no hesitation in saying
yes.”

With his usual gracious touch Thomas Cooper informed the legislature that it
would be possible to increase the popularity of the College among "the ignorant
people" by relaxing the admissions criteria, but that he was not interested in
such popularity. Governor Hammond commented in his 1844 message to the
legislature that even the "middle class" of the state (probably the slaveholders
with only a handful of slaves) could not gain access to the College.

You have liberally and wisely provided for the education of the more wealthy by
establishing a College, which has done, and continues to do more for the state
than every other corporation put together, within her limits; and you annually
bestow a large sum for the mental improvement of the poor, which I wish I could
say produced corresponding benefits. But for that large and substantial body,
constituting here, as it does in all countries, the broad and solid foundation
on which rests the framework of the political system, that middle class, who may
not take advantage of your free schools and cannot conveniently take advantage
of your College--you have done nothing.

The advocates of the College attempted to meet objections to its expensive
funding in a variety of ways, which gave the College good publicity, but never
addressed the fundamental inequities of the institution. Several generous
citizens established scholarships, but the number of students aided remained
small. When the College was reorganized in 1835, sumptuary laws were enacted
regulating the clothing and pocket money that the students would be allowed.
These laws were not very effective. Nor was a personal appeal by Governor George
McDuffie(’13). McDuffie, who had been able to attend the College only with the
financial help of charitable neighbors, wrote to an upcountry newspaper asking
that families with large fortunes curb their sons' spending while at the
College. “Citizens of great wealth in particular owe it to the state, to set a
public-spirited example, in regulating the expenses of their sons by reducing
them to such a standard of economy, that the sons of citizens of moderate
fortune may not be tempted to go beyond their means to avoid disparaging
imputations and invidious comparisons.” If, by good fortune and steady
application, a "poor scholar" were to get an education which would enable him to
meet the strict entrance requirements, there was still the problem of tuition
and associated costs. One critic of the College estimated the cost of a year's
education at between $500 and $1000, and while this was surely an exaggeration,
it is clear that education at South Carolina College was beyond the means of
most citizens. When Ben Tillman made the College the focus of his attacks on the
Bourbon elite in the gubernatorial campaign of 1890, he was articulating
grievances which some had felt from the founding of the College throughout the
antebellum period, but in a new constitutional context, in which white yeomen
farmers were able to exert greater political influence.

It served the interests of the Collegiate elite to have low rates of public
expenditure and high rates of yeoman illiteracy, and they were not reluctant to
say so. In 1856 when Fredrick Law Olmstead visited South Carolina, he noted that
“It has always been the opinion of the rulers of their community that it is
impossible to educate the laboring mass to a sufficiently good judgement to
enable them to take part in directing affairs of state”. Historians have
estimated that in 1880 between twenty-five and forty percent of adult white
South Carolinians were totally or nearly illiterate. It would be surprising if
literacy rates were higher in the antebellum period than postbellum. Clement
Eaton noted that in the 1850s in Richland county, where South Carolina College
was located, both sides in the gubernatorial election kept “pens” full of
illiterate voters who would sell their votes. Assuming that none of the elite
was illiterate, it is likely that a substantial part of the yeomanry was either
completely illiterate or only able to sign their name without being able to read
“distinctly”. During Reconstruction, an army officer noted: ““A visitor from
Charleston said to me, “you will find few people here who cannot read and
write.” The receipt rolls on which I issued clothing told a different story; not
one white recipient out of thirty made any other signature than a mark; and the
experience of the United States Marshall in paying witnesses was not very
dissimilar.” As one historian has noted, the prevalence of illiteracy was
exploited by clever apologists for the antebellum status quo, who used yeoman
illiteracy as an excuse for elite domination arguing that “momentous political
decisions should not be vested in an electorate containing a large number of
illiterates.” In antebellum South Carolina, oral means of political agitation
were not merely an option, they were a necessity. The stump speech and the after
dinner toast at a political barbecue were the best means of getting publicity
among those who lacked the capacity to read or income to get a newspaper.
Illiteracy was widespread among the yeomen, and many chose to leave the state to
pursue better lands and opportunities in the Gulf States where elite domination
was not so ubiquitous. Not surprisingly, South Carolina led the nation in
outmigration during the antebellum period, losing nearly forty percent of its
white population, which reinforced the power of the remaining elite still
further.

Among the gentry in antebellum South Carolina, personal connections were largely
familial or collegiate, and College friends heavily outnumbered relations by
marriage. One student had the College networks explained to him by his older
brother:

…[A]s to the actual practical advantages to be derived from a Collegiate
education I do not consider them many but the indirect advantages are many, for
instance it enables him to form acquaintances with the flower of his state,
acquaintances that may be of great benefit to him in after life, …it places him
on an equality as it were, with those whom he is likely to have to associate
with hereafter, persons raised in comparative obscurity are apt to form
incorrect views of themselves. They either over or underestimate their
capacities and in South Carolina especially young persons are apt to form
incorrect views of persons or people. The class termed the aristocracy for
instance are apt to be looked on as something superior (as they think themselves
to be) to other people and consequently when thrown into their society they feel
more or less embarrassed… …[T]hese are advantages worth something, and if a
young man wishes to study any of the learned professions, either law medicine,
divinity, or politics or school teaching the fact of his being a graduate of a
respectable college will prove of great advantage to him”

A graduate of the College had connections and references which would be
invaluable in a political career. A critic of the College wrote that a confidant
of his, a Major Henry, insisted that his son attend the College because of the
political advantages that accrued to alumni:

He sent his son to that College avowing his reasons generally to his personal
friends ... that it was a grinding necessity: if his son remained in the State,
his political ascendancy and promotion were almost hopeless, unless he were a
graduate. This was true, none knew it better than Major Henry. Now this is
precisely what we mean by the Domination of the College.

D.F. Jamison, (‘27) wrote in 1846 of his son’s education that he desired “…to
send him to our state institution, that he may have the benefit of meeting and
acting in afterlife with his College associates.” If an alumnus stayed within
South Carolina he became part of the small group of men who wielded the greatest
amount of political influence in the state. Jamison (’27) would know, as he
eventually became the president of South Carolina’s secession convention.

It is easy enough to see why many yeomen regarded the College as an undemocratic
imposition. It surely increased their resentment when they read (or heard, given
the high rates of illiteracy) from the newspapers the connection between the
College and the legislature, as when the Mercury announced blandly, that the
"College associations of Mr. Davant g[o]t him elected.” Alumni of the College
helped one another secure local offices as well and that a network of College
friends was important in getting appointments from the legislature. James Jones
(’24) wrote to his college friend, James Henry Hammond (’25), from Montgomery,
Alabama stating that

…a lawsuit which will detain me beyond the sitting of the legislature. I had
declared myself a candidate for Commission in Equity in Edgefield district
before I left home and am still anxious to obtain the office. I request the
favor of you to make it known to my friends, particularly those in the
legislature, Player (’22), Gist (’23), Clowney (’19), Colcock (’19), FY Simmons
(’22), JJ Caldwell (’17), James O’Hanlon, etc. etc. etc. Col. Whitner (’18) is
disposed to take a leg for me, speak to him on the subject, and do not suffer me
to be beaten.

Migration, malapportionment, property requirements for officeholding,
illiteracy, and a lack of credible leadership all contributed to the inability
of the yeomen to transform the relation between politics and education in
antebellum South Carolina. Sporadically during the antebellum period some
locally influential non alumni raised objections to the College, as with the
Unionist Dr. Landrum of the Edgefield, who was given to“…rants about lawyers and
College men”. Benjamin Perry began agitation in favor of a public school system
after he heard a commencement address at South Carolina College, in which one of
the editors of the Charleston Mercury, William Taber (’48) inveighed against
education for white laborers, charging that education made the inferior classes
vicious and idle.” Appalled, Perry reported in his upcountry newspaper, the
Greenville Southern Patriot, that “It was worthy of the dark ages of Europe and
the iron rule of a feudal baron. The whole speech was not only against human
liberty, but in opposition to republicanism, to civilization and to the spirit
of the age.” Perry insisted that “If the state could spend from $200 to $500
each for the education for the sons of the rich, it could afford also to educate
the sons of the poor.” Taber (’48) challenged Perry to a duel on account of his
indignant response, but Perry declined a confrontation with the young
“whipster”.

Those planters like Perry who had political ambitions but were not alumni of
South Carolina College connections often faced a cadre of alumni who might well
impede their policy proposals. However, it was not until the 1850s that the
discontents of those outside the collegiate elite became conspicuous and then
only when they were articulated by a few disaffected gentlemen legislators who
were not alumni. These men lacked the connections of College alumni so they
could not get legislation passed if the alumni bloc in the legislature decided
to prevent it. The alumni were generally satisfied with the status quo. The
legislative strength of the collegiate elite lay not so much in passing
favorable legislation but in their ability to obstruct unfavorable legislation.
In 1856, a conflict over public schools erupted in the legislature and spilled
over into the press in a most unseemly and anomalous way. The critique of the
collegiate elite that emerged from the newspaper battle which followed was a
most revealing anticipation of the themes articulated in the Tillman movement of
1890.

J. Wofford Tucker, president of the Spartanburg Methodist Female College, was a
legislator but not an alumnus. He took the nom de plume "Viator" in a fierce and
caustic newspaper attack upon the College and its political influence. "Viator"
had offered a radical proposal, a "School Reform Bill," which would have
allocated funds to establish a system of Common Schools. A bloc of College
alumni killed the bill, which would have offered primary education to the
yeomanry at state expense. Angry at the parsimony of the alumni and at his own
personal difficulties in advancing politically without College connections,
"Viator" was determined to expose what he took to be a cabal of
alumni/legislators.

Viator became the spokesman for those gentlemen outside the collegiate elite and
the yeomen who got little or no education from the state. He wrote, "the College
has governed the state for twenty years. But what do the people know of that
same College? Little indeed, have the 'outside barbarians' learned of this
mammoth power." Viator insisted that this "mammoth power,"

...the South Carolina College[,] has exercised a preponderant influence in this
state for many years; where is the proof? It is this: [O]nly the College is
funded by the state. Moreover] ...in almost all cases of election by the
Legislature for State or District offices, in which one applicant was a graduate
of the College and the other was not, the Collegiate has been elected.... [W]e
would be willing to expend the $25,000 a year now given to the rich through the
S.C. College, in the education of poor young men.... [O]ur resolutions were
openly and avowedly opposed in Committee by graduates of the College, on the
ground that to divide the state's bounty with other Colleges would build them up
and injure S. C. College and on no other ground.... [W]e met a sad and bitter
disappointment (in common with fifty other gentlemen who helped fight the
battle) in the defeat of the School Reform Bill mainly by votes of graduates of
the S. C. College.

The alumni were never a majority in the legislature, but they had extensive
family connections and many of them were able parliamentarians as well. The
alumni who formed a bloc in the legislature defeated the School Reform Bill by
shrewd maneuvering; they offered a counterproposal which would establish high
financial barriers that would maintain the College as an elite institution, and
give the College a better choice of students with uniform preparation. The
result was that no agreement was reached and no bill was passed.

The leading opponents of the School Reform Bill were graduates of the S.C.
College, the chief of whom offered a rival project. The project was--to
establish an academy of high grade in each Congressional district ... tuition
fees to be charged about the same as those charged in Colleges--that those
Congressional academies might serve as feeders--as preparatory schools--for the
S.C. College.... This was the measure offered by the College men--by the favored
ones of the S.C. College--to take the place of a plan of common schools that
might reach the people, and bless the children of the poor.

The alumni were quick to react to Viator's attack upon them and their Alma
Mater; they were every bit as touchy about their honor and the honor of the
College as the students were. Several alumni responded to Viator in print, and
although they were somewhat impeded by the fact that Viator's assertions were
true, constructing a plausible denial under such circumstances was a test of
rhetorical competence. The training in casuistry which the alumni received in
the Euphradian and Clariosophic societies stood them in good stead.

T. Stobo Farrow, (‘52) editor of the Spartanburg Express, had an extended debate
with Viator in print. Farrow's editorial answered Viator's charges that the
alumni dominated state politics and refused to fund education for the poor by
insisting that these facts were irrelevant because the real issue was who had
the most patriotic and philanthropic motives. Then he graciously gave Viator the
burden of proof: "Where is the proof that the opposers of Viator's Resolutions
were not actuated by as philanthropic and patriotic motives as the mover
himself. The fact of his resolutions being opposed mainly by graduates of the
South Carolina College is worth nothing for argument...." This was a clever
rhetorical trap. If Viator publicly impugned the motives of his opponents they
would be forced to challenge him and a duel or duels would ensue. Implicitly,
Farrow was offering to raise the stakes of this dispute from public policy to
blood. Farrow (’52) wanted to make it personal.

Viator did not take the bait. He instead iterated his argument that the alumni
were a closed group self consciously pursuing the interests of an elite at the
expense of the public interest:

The College--past and present, including all its pieces- is a political tyranny.
Its influence in the lawmaking assembly is almost omnipotent. Generally, no man
can be promoted to office within the gift of the Legislature who is not a
graduate of that College or the father, son, brother or cousin of someone who
has graduated there. The Speaker of the House and the President of the Senate
are graduates- the Judges and U. S. Senators, generally are graduates--Governors
are of the anointed, and few but those who can speak their "Shibboleth" can hope
for favors. Even in the appointment of Commissioners in Equity for the
districts--and certainly for Treasurer or other State officers-that man is in
danger who has to run against "College".

He further extended his argument from the concerns of gentlemen outside the
Collegiate elite to include those of the yeomen. "[W]e stated that we had no
sympathy with the 'Collegiate Government' because that influence had been
exerted against useful reform and against all schemes for the benefit of the
common people." His antagonist, Farrow (’52) could not allow such a series of
accusations to go unanswered. Clearly resenting the suggestion that the alumni
were a self-interested clique of highly educated planter/lawyers, Farrow
retorted:

He intimates that no one but a graduate of the South Carolina College can get an
office at the hands of the State Legislature. Even granting this position--Is it
not because it is a State institution that its graduates are able to obtain the
offices they may ask of the Legislature. Is it not more easily accounted for
from the fact that, being a flourishing institution and, sending out a large
number of graduates every year, whose merits being appreciated by the people of
their respective sections, are sent to the Legislature, where meeting as
members, a number of College acquaintances, nothing is more natural- and the
history of every institution shows the same sympathetic link binding its
graduates together--that they should support each other in preference to
strangers.

Farrow dodged what he could, ignored what he wished, admitted what he could not
conceal, and finished by returning to Viator the burden of proof. "If the South
Carolina College has governed the state for the last fifty years, the 'onus
probandi' rests upon him to show that it has not been wisely governed."

Viator, who was probably among the few non-alumni who understood what "onus
probandi" meant, vigorously took the burden of proof.

We answer, no. The state has not been well governed. So far as the College has
influenced state action, it has weighed like an incubus on State energy and
State progress. It has raised the cry of conservatism to oppose most useful and
popular reforms. It seeks to keep things as they were--to continue old forms and
old wrongs--old abuses and old monopolies. It has on most occasions, manifested
a hearty contempt for the common people, their rights and interests. The College
has not governed us well.

Farrow conceded that the legislature, largely composed of alumni, regularly gave
preference to alumni. He also acknowledged that alumni had a decided advantage
in being elected to the legislature, but he intimated that Viator was illogical
because, “Admitting its correctness, for the sake of argument, its fallacy will
sufficiently appear to the reader by remembering that the same charge will lie
with equal force against the Judiciary of the State. It is a well known fact
that no man in our State can be elected to any office when a Judge on the bench
happens to be his opponent”. Of course, Farrow was astute enough not to point
out that College alumni dominated the State judiciary as well. As one alumnus
noted, "it was a rare thing to find distinguished lawyers in any part of South
Carolina who were not graduates of the College." Undaunted by the "onus
probandi," Viator pressed home his attack by asserting that “Men of sense and
spirit in South Carolina must learn that one of two fates awaits their sons;
either they must exile themselves from their native state in order to induce a
proper and just recognition of merit, or they must consent to be rudely pushed
aside, as an inferior class, by the College.” Viator's telling criticisms of the
College and its influence on state politics was encapsulated in one caustic
passage:

... [T]he only extraordinary benefit to the state that the College has
conferred, or can confer, ... is to create and perpetuate a class, very nearly
akin to an aristocracy, who have controlled the policy and patronage of the
State, without any exalted intellectual or moral excellence that would entitle
that class by virtue of merit to any such controlling influence.

As always, the alumni were quick to rebut charges that the College was an elite
institution, and when the poverty of their argument became too apparent there
was nothing left but the making of ad hominem arguments. Defenders of the
College suggested that only men with evil ambitions would make such a
suggestion. As Rev. Whitfoord Smith (’30) wrote in 1857, "some designing
politicians have described the College as 'an aristocratic establishment'
intended to confer advantages upon the few to the exclusion of the many," but he
did not offer any evidence to contradict their claim. Other newspapers supported
Viator’s claim: Critics of the collegiate elite inveighed against the use of
education as a means of social control.

I am not in favor of keeping any institution, the ultimate end of which I cannot
see, one which is for a privileged class. I am in favor of doing justice to all
classes. The state has been too liberal and provided for one class, and that a
class, too that can well dispense with this assistance than any other class of
society. This State, in its devotion to that institution, has appropriated more
than a million dollars to its support, while we have fifteen or twenty thousand
whose eyes have never received the light of education. That institution has come
to be the mecca of the state to the neglect of the masses of society, so far as
education is concerned.

As one writer in the Winnsboro Register complained, "... all do not like to be
taxed to support an institution that excludes from any direct participation in
its benefits a majority of the taxpayers." A critic with similar views queried,
"Is it expedient--is it commendable--that the ploughman should have his earnings
extorted from him to support a College for the rich mainly?" Despite such
objections, the planters who dominated political life continued to fund the
College well and primary education poorly, if at all. Such was the cost of
insuring that their rulers would be "educated men. Nothing was done to provide
antebellum South Carolina with decent primary and secondary schools. Not until
the advent of the much maligned Republican regime of Reconstruction were
worthwhile common schools established. Those schools were destroyed by the
“Redeemers” after 1876.

However much the alumni made pro forma disclaimers that their interests were not
antagonistic to the interests of yeomen, in their own personal writings, and
doubtless in their talk among themselves, they implied that they were the
aristoi, the only class fit to govern. They believed, but generally had the good
taste not to openly state, that they possessed superior powers of moral
discernment. It was implicit in their self-conception and in their gnostic
pronouncements about what was ultimately best for society. The superiority of
their vision was validated in their view by the fact that so few saw the world
as they did. Conceiving of themselves as the last hope of true political virtue,
they defended slavery so as to defend themselves, so as to defend the last
remnant of traditional political morality. This class of men was made possible
by the ownership of slaves and political control over the majority of
nonslaveholding whites. As Hammond (’25) noted “As to slavery its fate is not
yet unveiled. My only hope for it is in keeping the actual slaveholders not only
predominant but paramount within its circle. It is weakened by every accession
of administrative and creative powers to the masses, even here.”

The elite needed the voluntary cooperation of the yeoman farmers, yet the
political theory they constructed to defend slavery often offended
nonslaveholding whites by eliding the differences between subordinate groups.
Hammond (’25) wrote to one of South Carolina’s judges that he had coined the
term “Democratic rabble”. Eager to avoid alienating the nonslaveholding yeomen,
however, he insisted somewhat disingenuously that “as first used in that
correspondence” it referred to “the licentious advocates of leveling
principles,” rather than all laboring whites. Sounding very much like his
teachers thirty years before, Hammond mused privately, “A Republican
government…I am inclined to think it is the worst form of government. I speak of
democratic republics in which universal suffrage is adopted and offices are open
to all. It is worse than what is usually called a despotism.”

For all their public protestations to the contrary, they seemed very comfortable
with aristocracy. Hammond noted in his diary: “The government of So Ca [sic] is
that of an aristocracy. When a Colony many families arose in the Low Country who
became very rich & were highly educated. They were real noblemen & ruled the
Colony & the State- the latter until about thirty years ago & to a very great
extent to the present moment. Hammond, who in his career held the office of
Governor and Senator, was thinking of himself and his social equals, the men who
dominated antebellum political life as "real noblemen." In contrast to his
students, Professor Francis Lieber had grown up in Europe; he had participated
in the Napoleonic Wars, and he had a first-hand acquaintance with "real
noblemen." He scornfully dismissed the pretensions of the South's posturing
arrivistes like Hammond:

I wish something were said somewhere about the Aristocracy of the south--one of
many hypocrisies or absurdities of the sort no longer repeated by the South,
that the North repeats it and believes it to this day. It is an absurdity. No
lower democracy than the southern and as to the few slaveholders, I have no
doubt that accurate inquiry would show that 2/3 perhaps 3/4 have been overseers,
are northerners, have kept shops, or been physicians and the like. They are
arrogant indeed but not aristocrats. How did Mr. Calhoun begin, and alas! how
have nearly all his sons ended? How did McDuffie begin? this verbiage about
aristocrats (Benjamin an aristocrat! Memminger! Jeff Davies!) has stood them in
good stead with the English. The claim of aristocracy stands on a par with their
claim of the divine origin of slavery, their claim of forming a distinct and
superior race and what not all!

It might be observed that the gentry in South Carolina dominated society because
they controlled land and labor, and this is true, but there was also a cultural
domination involved. The collegiate elite solidified and reinforced their
hegemony by controlling the means of education and mass information. South
Carolina’s elite derived its political power from slave produced wealth, but it
sustained itself by its control over the distribution of knowledge. By denying
majority of the yeomen the opportunity for education, they were made more
passive and credulous, easier to dominate. The elite had privileged access to
education which enabled privileged access to the means by which information was
distributed. By controlling a large number of newspapers and

pseudononymously writing much of the political content for others, the
collegiate elite shaped the vocabulary and limits of public discourse in
antebellum South Carolina. James Henry Hammond (’25) conspired with several his
cronies to get control of influential newspapers. He wrote privately “As regards
the newspaper, I think we ought to have one, but I still think it would be
better to get hold of an established one. I am of the opinion that the Mercury
can be got…(entre nous) Boyce (’36?), Felder (’22), and myself have laid a plan
for it without yet breaking it to Carew (’23). This is a profound secret…”

The atavistic political ideals of independence and honor which the College
instilled in the students contributed to the uniquely powerful combination of
localism and elitism of South Carolinian political life. Officeholding and honor
were reciprocating. Politics for the collegiate elite was an index of personal
status because public service was a token of honor. South Carolinian voters
selected among political men rather than political issues since there was a
general consensus among the elite about public policy and only independent
gentlemen could hold office in any case. Politics in antebellum South Carolina
was not bureaucratic but charismatic. Dr. Marion Sims (‘32) noted: "Then
politics were altogether of a personal character. There were no great principles
at stake; it was simply whether this or that man should be elected; and the man
who was the most popular, and had the most money, and could buy the most
whiskey, was generally the man that carried the day." While in the state
legislature, Daniel Huger (‘25) was asked what his constituents thought of a
bill. He indignantly replied: "Think! They will think nothing about it- they
expect me to think for them here." Like his Federalist grandfather, Huger was an
honorable gentleman capable of managing the public business independently
without demeaning instruction from constituents

There is a cliche about American government that "all politics is local." This
was truer in antebellum South Carolina than at any other place and time in
American history. There were no statewide elections of any kind in South
Carolina until Reconstruction. Citizens voted only for a state legislator and a
Congressman. The Lower House of the legislature appointed virtually all other
officials. At least one of the professors at the College thought that the
franchise was, as a result, nearly valueless:

The privilege of voting is undeniably an important and valuable privilege in a
free country, but the people of this state are denied this privilege in almost
all elections where it is worth something, and for this reason I care not to run
after the poor crumb of a right to vote for a member of the House of
Representatives-especially if the characters and qualifications of most
candidates are considered.

South Carolina had the highest property requirements in the United States for
lower house membership: ten slaves and 500 acres or real-estate worth 150 pounds
sterling. State Senators has to own real estate worth 300 pounds, These
requirements had not changed since 1790, and this was only the most conspicuous
of the Federalist holdovers in South Carolinian politics. The legislature was a
statewide caucus of planters which dominated political life within the state
because the members appointed virtually all officials who were not Congressmen.
In his diary, James Henry Hammond (’25), said simply that the

Legislature has all the power. The executive has none. The people have none
beyond electing members of the legislature, a power very negligently exercised
from time immemorial. [However] should the people become thoroughly disgusted
with the legislature and its managers [they would demand] sweeping changes in
the Constitution.... They will demand the Election of the Governor, of
Presidential electors, and perhaps of judges be given to them. They will
probably break down the Parish Representation and thus crush the Low Country
with its rotten boroughs.... They will increase the power of the Governor and
make him and the public officers responsible ... [to the people. The elite had
opposed these changes and] ... arrested them so far.

As Congressman, later Governor, Stephen Miller (’08) put it, “The political
power of the state is now in the hands of the intelligent and independent
planters, who think for themselves and act accordingly. A clear line was drawn
between those who fit to vote and those fit to govern. Legislation was for
gentlemen.

In the majority of the Congressional elections in South Carolina between 1824
and 1860, only one candidate ran, which simplified the outcome. The complete
lack of statewide elections helped foster a narrow range of political opinions
and impeded the institutionalization of political parties. South Carolina was
the only state that never moved beyond the eighteenth century Federalist notion
that faction and party was a political evil. Lawyer Paul Johnson (’37) struck a
Federalist pose when he insisted in 1856 that the lack of statewide elections
promoted political virtue because "it may be said of all parties among us that
they have no means, by our mode of conducting elections, to attract strength
outside of their own creed." This thwarted "that bane of public virtue - party
organizations." Similarly, Lewis Malone Ayer (’39), a member of South Carolina’s
secession convention, noted approvingly that these unique electoral practices
impeded the formation of political parties and fostered ideological homogeneity.
He argued that the result (in other states) of popular vote for “All the high
officers of the State and General government, [was that] ... elections so often
recurring maintained among them permanent party divisions producing more and
more bitterness of feeling, and greater and greater diversity of views and
interests year after year.” Hammond wrote in a Federalist tone that the citizens
of South Carolina were "... the finest mass that is or ever was united under any
form of government-Intelligent, high spirited and almost entirely free from
factious political influences." He feared however that the electorate would be
corrupted by popular election of the president and the "constant exercise of
political power ... [and] the party lines, the miserable factions, that must
speedily arise."

According to James L. Petigru (‘09), the combined result of all these
conservative forces associated with the College was an unprecedented unanimity
of political opinion among those men whose opinions determined the direction and
content of public policy. “The unanimity which for years has marked the
republican councils of the state deserves to be mentioned as the unexpected
solution, a successful development of the long continued drama. From the most
heterogeneous we have become the most united of all the political

communities on this continent.” Congressman W.F. Colcock (‘23) informed an 1851
Southern Rights Convention that parties were the source of the unseemly
political footdragging evident in the other states of the lower South:

The chief cause for this state of forwardness on the part of South Carolina is
the entire absence of party division within her borders.... In our sister states
the people have been drawn away from the calm and unbiased consideration of
great Federal questions, and have been engaged in eager strife for party
ascendancy. But with us there has always been a "unity of sentiment" which has
emphatically "constituted us one people."

In other states, parties bureaucratized the process of political
decision-making, and this tended to force negotiation and accommodation among
plural political interests. Professional "partisans" were often more interested
in maintaining their party's control over patronage, government contracts,
legislative committee assignments and the like, than they were in maintaining
ideological purity. In other states the institutionalization of political
parties diluted ideological disputes and forced logrolling accommodation and
careful balance of competing concerns. Ever conscious of political principle,
South Carolinian politicians viewed the triumph of practice over theory in the
federal government as "corruption," and so it was, for men whose conceptions of
political virtue were relics of high Federalist piety. The public commitment to
principle was part of the ethos of honor which the College alumni demanded
personally of all gentleman in politics. In aggregate it fostered an ideological
purity and a reluctance to compromise which was one of the most conspicuous
qualities of South Carolinian politicians. In the 1850s, as the second political
party system collapsed, the principled purity of the South Carolinian
politicians' beliefs and the aptness of their explanations made them look like
prophets to the rest of the lower South.

Charles E. B. Flagg (’46) was vexed by the charge that secessionists were
tumultuous, unpatriotic revolutionaries. In his Fourth of July oration in 1858,
he retorted, with considerable justice, that South Carolinian secessionists were
the most conservative politicians in the country:

We cannot be silent when gravely charged with alienation from the principles
which actuated the wise and venerated patriots in the conduct of the Revolution,
and in the establishment of our Republic.... [A] fearful conflict is going on
between principle and power.... Party strife, political agitation, and all the
troubled elements of confusion and anarchy, have swept, like a mighty hurricane
over this land.... [T]hese evils originated, and are now in active operation in
one section of the Union.

In typical Federalist style Flagg (’46) criticized Northerners for making
hypocritical accusations of treason which were stalking horses for their own
unprincipled partisanship:

Remember that the people of that section chant most loudly the praises of Union.
They raise the cry of folly, crime and treason, against all who dare to speak
about a Southern Confederacy.... It is not necessary to comment on upon the
causes which have changed the political elements, which have formed new and
distinct party lines, producing the utter dispersion of the Whigs and the
weakness and prostitution of the National Democracy. Faith cannot now be placed
in any national party.... All these great evils have been caused by the
abandonment of principle and the abuse of power.

From the perspective of this alumnus, and the "principled" gentlemen he spoke to
and for, their "education" made them superior to the partisan Yankees who had
for some years been foolishly advocating novel doctrines.

Political agitation, fanaticism and party strife, in some parts of the country,
have raged with such ungovernable violence, as to produce that intestine
discord, alienation, distrust and enmity, which in other times and among other
people, would certainly have led to civil war and revolution. Today, however it
is my privilege and honorable duty to address those who, by the influence of
education, principle and feeling, are removed in some measure, above and beyond
those angry, exciting elements of confusion and strife, which too often
overwhelm the less informed, and those who have not lived long enough to learn
the important lessons of wisdom, which experience teaches.

The "important lessons of wisdom" which South Carolina's political leaders had
learned were that the uncompromisingly conservative, proslavery, anti-party,
strict constructionist political thought they had adopted must not be tainted by
concessions to expediency or democracy. South Carolina would not have elevated
to high office a man like Daniel Webster because of his fundamentally mistaken
political ideas, but it also would not have elected a man like Henry Clay
because he seemed to have no fundamental political ideas to be mistaken about.
The mores of the collegiate elite were such that pragmatism was interpreted as a
sign of weak character which disqualified a man from office. As South Carolina’s
Senator Butler (’17) informed his colleagues on the Senate floor, “An
accommodating spirit is generally associated with a facility in morality.” Like
the students in the College, most of the South Carolinian delegation in Congress
disapproved of the Compromise of 1850 not merely because it was a cosmetic
response to sectional disputes, but also because they found political dealmaking
odious. Principles were at stake and honor allowed for no compromises.

During South Carolina’s gubernatorial race of 1840, James Henry Hammond (‘25)
read a letter to the editor of the Charleston Mercury, signed pseudononymously
“South Carolina” which obliquely accused him of writing political essays on his
own behalf. Furious, Hammond sent a friend to demand of the editor, John Stuart
(’17) the name of the author, which was the usual prelude to a duel. John Stuart
refused to divulge the name of “South Carolina” to T. L. Hamilton (Hammond’s
“friend”, who would act as second in a duel) unless Hammond explicitly avowed
his intention to duel. In reply, Hammond (‘25) wrote to Stuart (’17) that he was
“pretty directly charged with writing articles in the newspapers in favor of my
own election and that is offensive”. In an enclosure to Stuart, Hammond avowed a
demand for formal explanation, the implication being that either Stuart publish
a public disclaimer from “South Carolina”, or that he reveal who wrote the
letter so that Hammond could demand “satisfaction”, or face a challenge himself.
Stuart (’17) replied with a denial of any personal reference. Hammond (‘25)
menacingly wrote back, “The more the delay the more conspicuous and ample the
apology”. Stuart agreed to print a carefully worded disclaimer of personal
reference to Hammond, and the dispute was adjusted without loss of honor or
blood.

Since electioneering was so dishonorable that even the hint of self-promotion,
much less a direct charge of electioneering, could lead to a duel, unusual
questions emerge about the mechanics of political activity in antebellum South
Carolina. How could candidates campaign in the absence of institutionalized
political parties? In the absence of party conventions, how were candidates
nominated and by whom? If a candidate could not honorably solicit votes, how did
the electorate find out he was running? If a candidate could not write on his
own behalf, how could the voters know his political views?

The voluminous letters of Hammond are revealing on these questions because
Hammond saved the literary remains of his long political career and extensive
political connections. Hammond’s surprise at the existence of Judge Munn
suggests some of the answers. Throughout most of the nineteenth century, South
Carolina had a small, homogeneous, self-conscious ruling elite reticulated with
marital and collegiate connections. The members of this elite understood that,
as with dueling, in politics much depended on properly maintaining appearances
and on the good offices of reliable proxies. Hammond wrote before the 1840
gubernatorial election to his friend Congressman Francis Pickens (‘27) “I can
not be guilty of the indecorum of [“election” crossed out by Hammond] appearing
to electioneer for myself. Appearances were crucial. However, if the appearance
of electioneering could be avoided, much could be done behind the scenes. When
asked about his electoral prospects Hammond was suitably coy, maintaining the
pretence of disinterest. “I know less perhaps of the electioneering movement
than almost anyone in the district…” but his ignorance of such matters was
palliated by the fact that “…I have the good fortune to have some much attached
friends in the district.” Hammond’s letters reveal the subtle sounding of
collegiate acquaintances and careful planning with collegiate friends to secure
the endorsement of local elites and control of newspapers so important to
election. Hammond’s papers contain correspondence with over one hundred College
alumni.

The intrigues surrounding Hammond’s first congressional race in 1834 reveal
important details of how “much attached friends” could sustain a candidate’s
claims in the complex political negotiations among local notables. Hammond (‘25)
wrote fellow alumnus and nullifier, Jacob McMichael (’30) that

I was in Columbia during the first week of the session and so strongly solicited
from various respectable quarters to come out for Congress…I left under the
impression that there would be no opposition… Since I came home, Elmore (’19),
of whom I had heard not a word suggested in Columbia, has come out and without
saying a word to me. As I do not recognize his claims as being so superior to my
own as to require me to withdraw, I am not disposed , under the circumstances to
leave the field entirely open to him…. Sound Rowe (’30) [Illegible name],
Jamison (’27), the Glovers (’23 and ’29), Tyler… I shall be supported by Preston
(‘12), Butler (’17), Stark (’32), Dr. Cooper, Clark(’19), etc remember me to
your brother Richard (’27) whom I have long intended to write.

Hammond had been informally selected and would ultimately be sustained by a
caucus of the local gentry supplemented by the flamboyant president of the
College, Dr. Cooper. Franklin Elmore (’19), Hammond’s rival, had been encouraged
to come out for Congress by some other equally respectable gentlemen. This was
the most pressing danger of eschewing institutionalized parties. Hammond and
Elmore were both nullifiers, so to run against one another would damage their
cause. Yet to withdraw was to acknowledge and defer to the superiority of one’s
rival. Tricky questions of honor came into play because as relative merit was
assessed invidious distinctions could not help but be made. At an impasse,
Hammond was unwilling to withdraw but also wished to avoid a difficult electoral
contest. After all, he had only agreed to run on the understanding that he would
have no opposition. As Hammond wrote to a friend and political supporter, J.H.
Rowe (’30) he only ran because “I had ascertained that Glover (’23), Thompson
(’14), Bookter (’13), McCord (’14) and [Illegible name] would neither of them be
candidates and that in all probability I would have no opposition…”

To solve this problem, Elmore (‘19) wrote Hammond (‘25) that since “Our friends
are the same” in order to prevent a disputed election, he proposed to have a
“nominating convention” Hammond (‘25) sensed a trick suspecting that a
convention would be decided before it met. He privately wrote “Elmore is as
cunning as the devil” and rather than have a convention he would have “friends
decide”. Having calculated on the prosaic basis of expediency, Hammond (‘25)
replied to Elmore in the ethereal terms of political theory. He insisted that he
was “opposed in principle to all caucus nominations upon which the people are to
act, except in great emergencies and when important principles are involved” and
he proposed instead to “lay the matter before mutual friends”. Elmore (’19) had
a substantial network of College acquaintances plus a large and influential
network of family relations. Hammond’s network of college associates was largely
made up of committed political activists, (including important members of the
College faculty) and he was supported by other influential families that
disliked the Elmores and their clique. Elmore (’19) rejected the arbitration of
friends, but dropped out of the race, ostensibly due to poor health, more than
six months before the election. Hammond (’25) went to Washington without much
visible exertion.

During the half year prior to his one horse race on Election Day, Hammond
attended numerous barbecues given by his friends in the counties comprising his
electoral district. Without “electioneering”, Hammond made his views known when
he was invited to give political speeches. The alumni, trained in rhetoric, were
very effective on the stump. Political barbecues were an important venue for
ameliorating with speeches and food and whisky some of the hard feelings that
developed between the class of men who held office in South Carolina and the
class that merely had the franchise, the yeomen farmers. As one of Hammond’s
unofficial noncampaign managers, J.B. McMichael (’30) wrote him, there was
conflict between the rich and the poor, with “bad feeling between the rich
planters on the river and the settlers on the piney land”.

Hammond’s run for the governorship in 1840 reveals the extent of collegiate
connections even better than his election to Congress, because he encountered
genuine opposition, and the campaign, being run everywhere in the state but
decided in the State House, was much more complex. The same stylized
protestations and carefully rehearsed spontaneity characterized this election.
Without the vulgarity of soliciting votes, Hammond socialized strategically.
Samuel Wilds Trotti (‘32), who was later sent to Congress from South Carolina,
advised Hammond that “…a great deal may be done during race week as a great many
country people will be in town and of course many of our old College friends,
some from the lowcountry who I do not often have the opportunity of seeing.
Hammond’s supporters also used their contacts on his behalf. Maximilian Laborde
(‘21) wrote Hammond (‘25) offering assistance and advice. “One thing is certain,
that Dargan (‘21) and Henagan can give the [Darlington?] vote to whom they
please. If Dargan (’21), who by the by is an old classmate of mine, comes to the
Appeals Court I will give him a talk.”

The personal connections between College friends were generally congruent with
their ideological commitments. Nullifier Thomas Starke (‘32) wrote Hammond from
Columbia. “…[W]ith regard to your election about which I feel a deep interest
not only from my personal friendship which has never been shaken from our
schoolboy days to their present time, but from political feelings of deep-rooted
abhorrence of each and every member of the party that deserted our state.” South
Carolina’s Radical Nullifiers were still a potent force in 1840 and virtually
all supported Hammond on account of his extremist views and their conspiratorial
inclinations. Calhoun covertly supported the more moderate Richardson (’19), a
former Unionist. Difficult as it is to see in the context of national politics,
in the context of the Palmetto State, Calhoun was a conservative moderating
force; he accepted the difficult task of keeping the state politically unified
by reining in the ultras like Hammond (’25).

Much political maneuvering had to be done secretly with a few trusted personal
friends. One former Nullifier wrote Hammond that

My object is now to suggest to you recommend that a Committee of old nullifiers
of Barnwell be privately organized to write to all the old nullifiers who were
prominent…It is the course I am secretly taking in every Congressional district
by writing the principal men. This had better be done sub rosa for fear of an
added excitement among the union men. I have not yet spoken to a Nullifier who
has not said he wanted to support you.

Hammond (‘25) was advised that “If it becomes evident that our object is to
perpetuate the supremacy of the Nullification party, without doubt we shall lose
the state…”. Hammond’s friends exerted themselves quietly in managing the
election, creating lists of prominent men committed for and against Hammond and
giving advice about local conditions. Judge A. G. McGrath (’31) wrote Hammond
from Charleston “Down here we must manage very quietly, lest more harm than good
be done, and it is in your interest not to agitate here.” The mechanics of
managing an election without electioneering hinged on connections to local
notables and through them managing newspapers, their editors and their editorial
content. As one of Hammond’s alumni correspondents noted, “Almost all elections
are influenced by a show of strength…”

The South Carolina College alumni were a cognitive as well as an economic elite.
It was illegal to teach slaves to read and the legislature showed no inclination
to provide decent common schools for less affluent whites. They were used to and
dependent upon controlling the information to which not just slaves, but yeomen,
had access. This is why the mass mailing of abolitionist tracts in the 1830s
alarmed South Carolina’s collegiate elite to the extent that influential men
like Congressman Hammond (’25) could seriously propose that northern
abolitionists be sent to the South to be tried and executed. In the 1850s the
writings of Hinton Rowan Helper caused a similar hysteria. The collegiate elite
kept yeomen without schooling; simultaneously the strove to control the means of
mass communication, newspapers. During Reconstruction, when “Red Shirts” used
violence to force Republicans to “divide time” at political rallies, Gary (’52)
and Hampton (‘36) and the other members of the elite which led them were trying
to reestablish the control over public political discourse they had exercised
during the antebellum period.

Before the Civil War, the collegiate elite edited or had influence over the
editors of most papers received in the state, and they were prolix writers of
controversial essays and letters. Newspapers were the fulcrum by which the
collegiate elite leveraged their superior skills at symbol manipulation into
control over the terms and parameters of public discourse. College alumni
edited, often for extended periods of time, at least twenty five newspapers in
antebellum South Carolina. The alumni were particularly influential in
determining the political content of the Charleston Mercury, which was often
taken to be the quasi official voice of South Carolinian separatists.

Samuel Wilds Trotti (’32) advised Hammond (‘25) “Silence may do very well in
Charleston where so much is done by intrigue. But to carry the country and here
the whole strength of the state exists, a different course is necessary. The
country folks have a wonderful propensity to believe everything they see in the
newspapers…” Hammond, who had become a newspaper editor shortly after graduation
from College, knew that the press was the main medium of mass communication in
antebellum South Carolina. He wrote, “men …must, if their patriotism leads them
to serve their country, use the press…These views I entertained nearly twenty
years ago when I set up a newspaper in Columbia.” Yet he warned his son that
being an editor was a calling “…of very doubtful respectability. Editors are
usually regarded as poor devils to be kicked and cuffed and one can avoid being
so considered except at the cost of a fight or two.”

In order to sway an election district without being accused of electioneering,
Hammond had to orchestrate the writings of friends. Congressman Francis Pickens
(’27) advised Hammond to use a deft touch: “Make the nomination one between the
people and the newspaper editors.” Hammond’s collegiate connections with local
notables gave him information about which newspapers were influential in
specific localities, which allowed him to target the advocacy of his cronies. As
one contemporary noted disapprovingly, “In S.C, the great difficulty is that the
people never have but [one] side of the question” One of Hammond’s advisors,
J.P. Carroll (’27) informed him

Nathan Davis, (’38) who is on a visit to Preston Brooks (’39), thinks that you
will receive a majority of the votes of the Fairfield delegation… If at all
possible have some movement in your favor made in the Pee Dee region. The
present Governor told Brooks that the Mercury and the South Carolinian are the
only papers taken there and that the impressions of that portion of the state
were derived almost exclusively from those papers.

Once the most effective newspapers were selected, Hammond’s friends wrote on his
behalf and convinced their friends to write on his behalf as well. Trotti (’32)
wrote Hammond, “…the Newberry folks ought to be attended to. I shall write
immediately my old College friend Sumner (’31) who is partner at law with Fair
(’34)… I am making arrangements to have several articles written in your favor
for the Mercury and the Carolinian.” Without ever violating the ban on
electioneering, Hammond organized and delegated writing assignments on his
behalf. Trotti (’32) informed Hammond (’25) about the previous week’s Charleston
Courier

[M]y piece and Bellinger’s (‘24) have both appeared- mine over the signature of
“Palmetto” and Bellinger’s over a “Sub Treasury Union Man” which is the
signature you desired his piece to appear over….Give yourself no uneasiness
about Geiger (’24) and Blakeney (’31)- they and a good many of my other College
friends have been attended to….Our friend McMichael (’30) wrote the piece signed
“Orangeburg”…Mac says he intends to write again.

Once an essay or letter was written, it could reverberate in the public
consciousness for months thereafter because newspapers in the state often
reprinted each other’s copy. Newspaper editors often had a mutual exchange
policy which supplied them with current and reprintable material delivered by
boat or railroad or stagecoach. Thus Hammond was shrewd when he noted “It is
more important to multiply organs than articles…” because previously written
matter could simply be replicated. This meant that a small number of highly
educated and strategically placed men could amplify their voices far beyond
their numbers by controlling the means of mechanical reproduction. The
collegiate elite, prone to fire eating eloquence on the stump and proslavery
separatism in print, exercised considerable control of the means of mass
communication, and this reinforced the rigid ideological narrowness of policy
discussion. Conformity was complete by mid-century. South Carolina’s press spoke
with one voice. In 1860 not a single newspaper supported Bell or Douglas, much
less Lincoln. The Charleston Mercury took note of this unique unanimity: “What
has produced this unanimity in South Carolina? It is, because the Press and the
public men of South Carolina have been more true and faithful to the rights of
the South than they have been in other Southern states.”

Despite the hard work and good offices of his friends, Hammond lost the 1840
race for Governor to the former Unionist John P. Richardson, (‘19). Richardson,
who had the support of Calhoun and much of the lowcountry, also used his
collegiate connections to get elected, and he had little choice, because it was
the only game in town. As an olive branch to Hammond in the wake of his defeat,
a group of lowcountry gentleman offered support from Calhoun and from South
Carolina’s most influential newspaper two years hence when the legislature
selected another Governor. They assured him it would be his turn. Merrit E. Carn
(’31) wrote Hammond saying that he “expresses the feelings of many of the
gentlemen of Charleston who opposed you in the late contest and that this course
is desired by some of the big ones at Washington… the influence of these
gentlemen in all their ramified connections is considerable and you will be
certain of the Charleston Mercury at all events.” Many elections were decided
behind the scenes and before the fact. Hammond became Governor in the next
election.

The posturing and intrigue and machinations endemic to antebellum South
Carolina’s political culture easily descended into various kinds of dishonorable
behavior. Theft of mail was common. Not only were abolition tracts censored,
internal political correspondence was stolen in transit. Maxcy Gregg (‘35),
Louis Wigfall’s (’37) dueling second, wrote Hammond: “I have a strong suspicion
that your missing letter to me found its way, perhaps through Washington to some
antisecession quarter in Columbia, long before the end of the session…What
precedes I wrote at Gadsden, on my way to Kershaw Court and have copied off, in
small hand to avoid suspicious bulk.” Hammond wrote another correspondent “Your
last letter has not reached me yet. It is probable that some of the postmasters
took it as a toll for they level tithes…. In one remarkable letter, Millege Luke
Bonham (’34), later Congressman Bonham, wrote to Hammond asking to borrow his
dueling pistols, because he intended to meet Louis Wigfall (’37) over an affair
of honor and he enclosed another letter in a numerical code apparently because
he knew that the mail was not secure.

To describe the internal politics of antebellum South Carolina as “Byzantine”
does a great injustice to the Turks. The political culture of antebellum South
Carolina made Byzantium look like a place of plain dealing. Much of what was
done and said privately or semiprivately in political life was at variance with
the public requirements of honor. Corruption was endemic to South Carolina’s
political life, but unlike the crude machinations of Yankee politics, this
corruption was usually within the bounds of good taste and the law. Money
changed hands, but in the genteel form of a sudden windfall from numerous
simultaneous newspaper subscriptions, not a common bribe; lies were told, but
with lawyerly prevarication and misdirection, there were few bald falsehoods.
The high degree of tension between honorable behavior and the practical
political necessity was often resolved in politically inspired duels. In 1851,
Hammond described in less than honorable terms, several influential alumni who
would later become members of South Carolina’s secession convention.

Perrin (’27), who is a sneak, one of your solemn, candid plainspoken
hypocrites…full of bile and envy but smooth as a plum. As to the Wardlaws (’16
and ’18), old Frank (’18) is the only one worth a shuck. The judge (’16) is and
always was a dog. And I have found him so in everything I ever had to do with
him. He owes me much. I prevented [illegible] from killing him in 1830. He knows
it.

In the context of the sentiments the elite sometimes expressed about each other,
(often phrased in language that if made public would immediately provoke a duel)
the elaborate rituals of polite conversation begin to seem more functional than
ornamental. During his bid for the governorship in 1840, Hammond wrote that
“…treachery is the very oil of the machinery” and he did not exaggerate. He was
informed by lawyer J.M. Walker (‘30) in an envelope marked “confidential without
exception” that “Some of your supposed friends have I think misled or deceived
you…our opponents are informed of matters which you could have confided only to
supposed supporters.” The personal nonbureaucratic aspect of antebellum South
Carolinian politics promoted betrayal, guile and pretence, which often made
coalitions unstable and support uncertain.

Hammond wrote Congressman Pickens (’27) that, “…I am warned of treachery at
every quarter”, and political dangers in fact came from every angle. Some
political dirty tricks were done by proxy, in order to coax embarrassing
admissions from a candidate. In a political culture pervaded by personal
connections, Hammond received a letter from a stranger within the state and was
consequently suspicious. An unknown John Williams of Lancaster county wrote to
Hammond asking about the most famous of his proslavery writings, The Clarkson
Letters. He inquired did you intend “…to convey that Poor men should not be
entitled to vote, or that it was necessary for the preservation of republican
institutions that the poor should be excluded from voting?” Worried that a
candid answer might alienate nonslaveholding yeomen, Hammond wrote on the
envelope “No answer to this letter. I have no acquaintance with the Author-
Lancaster was a bitter Union district-belongs to Richardson (‘19). This may be a
trap laid by him.”

Many members of the collegiate elite were located in Charleston and Columbia and
when they were compressed together the political maneuvering became especially

conspicuous. Hammond thought Charleston especially levantine: “people think of
nothing in Charleston but combination, intrigue and conspiracy.” In 1852 Hammond
learned that Charleston’s Judge McGrath (‘31) had not been completely candid
with him in their political dealings. Using “fighting words” he wrote a friend
“…that double dyed traitor and scoundrel, McGrath (‘31) has been undermining me
from the beginning. I suspected it…” The suave backbiting and elegant
doublecrossing and polite hypocrisy habitual in political life were inevitably a
source of personal violence. In antebellum South Carolina, politics could not be
separated from dueling because the political could not be separated from the
personal.

Edgefield County was a particularly dramatic locality during the gubernatorial
race of 1840 because it featured a battle between local elites for control of a
newspaper, polymorphous violence, and a very extensive web of collegiate
connections involved in both. The county was polarized between two familial
coalitions. Louis T. Wigfall (’37) was the College friend of future Governor
John Lawrence Manning (’37), who was managing the successful noncampaign for his
uncle, John P. Richardson (‘19). Wigfall and his cronies consequently supported
the former Unionist. Opposed to Wigfall and his connections were the Brooks clan
and their relations. The head of the clan was Col. Whitfield Brooks (’12) of
bull drowning fame. His impulsive young son Preston Brooks (’39), who had the
previous year been expelled from the College a week before graduation on account
of an unfortunate incident with pistols, was Wigfall’s rival for a local belle.
Politics in Edgefield was intensely and violently personal. The Brooks family
had marital connections with Maximilian LaBorde (’21) the editor of the only
newspaper in Edgefield, the Advertiser. So long as the owner of the paper was
also on friendly terms with the Brooks clan, the Advertiser would support
Hammond.

Acting secretly, Wigfall (’37) bluffed the owner of the Advertiser into
publishing an editorial endorsement and nomination of Richardson (’19).
Chagrined, the Brooks clan squeezed the owner and editor behind the scenes. Two
weeks later the Advertiser retracted its endorsement. Wigfall (’37) wrote
Manning (’37) to organize a subscription campaign of men who demanded support
for Richardson (’19) in exchange for their cash. When subscription money began
to stream in, the Advertiser went back to supporting Richardson (’19). Wigfall
(’37) began to publish his own letters to the editor supporting Richardson, and
the editor, Maximilian LaBorde (’21) who supported Hammond and the Brooks clan
because he was a relative by marriage, resigned. Wigfall then became the de
facto editor, and the owner, flush with money, let him write what he wished. The
proper application of subscription money, Wigfall (’37) crowed, had made the
paper’s owner his slave: “I can now say to him “go” and he goeth, “come” and he
cometh.”

As the campaign wore on, earlier personal conflicts between the Preston Brooks
(’39) and Wigfall resurfaced. As A. P. Butler (’17) wrote Hammond, the “[r]eal
cause of the controversy between Brooks and Wigfall may be traced to
communications in the newspapers on the Governors election.” Wigfall had been
the second in a duel, after which he called the other principal, Joseph Glover
(’29) a coward. They had reconciled but Brooks (’39) informed Glover (’29), that
Wigfall (’37) continued to maintain that he was a coward. This was an assertion
that demanded an inquiry and either a retraction or a duel between Glover (’29)
and Wigfall (’37). Wigfall (’37) retorted that Brooks was a “liar”, which was
grounds for a duel between Wigfall and Brooks. The two later met by chance and
loud aggressive mutual charges of mendacity were exchanged. Brooks could not
contain his temper, a brief fistfight ensued, and Brooks penned a challenge
which Wigfall promptly accepted.

Brooks and Wigfall went to the state line to prepare for their encounter. Duels
were often held half in one state and half in another. If murder charges were
ever sought sympathetic judges and juries might use the jurisdictional question
to abstain from legal action. A Board of Honor made up of eminent men including
Franklin Elmore (‘19) and Wade Hampton (‘36), spontaneously convened and stopped
them at the border. This prevented the duel by adjusting the conflict with no
loss of honor. Shortly thereafter, one of Hammond’s advisors, J.P. Carroll
(’27), (who was Brooks’ brother in law) denounced Wigfall for breach of trust.
Carroll and Wigfall had conversed while drinking heavily. Wigfall had later
revealed the contents of their conversation, which no gentleman, drunk or sober,
ought to do.

Intermediaries prevented a duel, but Wigfall, concerned about his public
standing after the abortive duel, printed in his newspaper, the Advertiser, an
account of the Board of Honor proceedings which reflected unfavorably on Preston
Brooks. Since his son, Preston (’39) was not in town at the time, Col. Whitfield
Brooks (‘12), the paterfamilias, had a contradictory account published. His
honor impugned, Wigfall challenged the elder Brooks to a duel, who refused. In
response, Wigfall informed the Colonel that he was a scoundrel and a coward and
would be “posted” as such that afternoon in front of the courthouse. Seeking to
avert Col. Brook’s ritual dishonor, Carroll (‘27) and his nephew Thomas Bird
(’39) arrived at the courthouse and tore the placard down. Twenty-two year old
Bird (’39) pulled a gun and tried to shoot Wigfall, but missed. Wigfall, who
never ventured outdoors without two loaded pistols, killed Bird (’39) on the
spot. Enraged and clutching his fallen nephew, Carroll (’27) called Wigfall a
“cold-blooded murderous scoundrel” and Wigfall immediately challenged him. They
agreed to duel in five days while the murder charges were still pending against
Wigfall. When Preston Brooks returned to town and was appraised of the affair he
also challenged Wigfall and Wigfall was happy to accept, ominously scheduling
the duel a week after his duel with Brooks’ brother in law Carroll. Wigfall
dueled with Carroll on a sandbar in the Savannah River, which is the boundary
between Georgia and South Carolina. Both missed the initial exchange of shots,
and they were satisfied without a further exchange of fire. Wigfall was more
concerned with his upcoming duel with Preston Brooks.

While waiting for the fateful day the art of dueling became an absorbing
interest for the Brooks household. The most famous exponent of the code duello
in the state was Col. Alfred Cummings, who drew blood yet emerged unscathed in a
conspicuous series of duels with Governor George McDuffie, (‘13). The elder
Brooks (’12) wanted Cummings’ services as a teacher for his son Preston (’39)
before he met Wigfall. Since Brooks did not know Cummings personally, he made
use of his collegiate connections. Col. Brooks persuaded his brother in law,
J.P. Carroll (’27) to contact his friend Hammond (’25) who would contact
Hammond’s friend Col. Cummings. “Whitfield Brooks is very anxious that Preston
should have the benefit of a few days training by Alfred Cummings before he
fights.” The Collegiate network was very extensive, and Preston Brooks got
plenty of practice and good advice on dueling technique before he exchanged
shots with the future Senator from Texas.

Wigfall’s older brother Hamden (’22) was killed in a duel after leaving the
College abruptly in the middle of his sophomore year. This may help explain
Wigfall’s macabre fascination with the Code Duello. Wigfall was a very touchy
duelist for whom the danger of sharing his brother’s demise seemed to be as much
an attraction as a fear. For a variety of motives, he was ruthless in his intent
to kill Preston Brooks (’39) and the elite generally thought Wigfall too
attached to the code even by South Carolinian standards. Brooks and Wigfall met
on the same sandbar used a week earlier by Carroll and Wigfall. Both men wanted
blood. Nervous, they missed on the first fire, as had been the case with in the
duel with Carroll a week earlier. The seconds proposed reconciliation on
honorable terms, but both principals rejected the proposal. They demanded
another shot. On the second round both fired simultaneously. Both fell. The
dispute was ended. Brooks was shot through the hips, Wigfall through both
thighs. Brooks walked with a cane for the rest of his life. Congressman Brooks
used this cane on Senator Sumner’s head in 1856. Wigfall recovered from his
wounds, the Grand Jury refused to indict him in the murder of Thomas Bird, (’39)
accepting his plea of self-defense. Wigfall moved to Texas in 1846, and in 1860
when he arrived in Washington as Senator Wigfall his reputation preceded him.
Every politician knew of this fire-eater’s reflexive resort to violence and his
eagerness to invoke the code.

Politics in antebellum South Carolina was sui generis, particularly because the
duel was so consistently popular among elite politicians. In the wake of
especially regrettable results such as the death of Alexander Hamilton, dueling
had gone into disfavor in other states. This was not the case in South Carolina,
which was the last state in the Union to outlaw dueling, in 1881. One polite
atrocity after another scars the annals of South Carolinian politics. Although
gentlemen throughout the South occasionally had recourse to the code, nowhere
was dueling a more important or conspicuous part of political life than South
Carolina. The reason for this may be that in South Carolina there was a greater
functional utility for this quaint custom. Every state, including South
Carolina, needed to identify and promote political leaders on a regular basis.

In other states during the antebellum period these functions were
bureaucratically performed by political parties. In South Carolina, the
Federalist antiparty legacy persisted. The sectional agitation surrounding
nullification in the 1820s and 30s helped choke off development of a party
system because it alienated leading state figures from both national parties.
Opposition to Jackson drove many away from the Democrats, but the consolidating
Whigs held little attraction, so South Carolina, abetted by its own organic
intellectual elite, went its own way. In the absence of an organized system of
political parties, alumni politicians functioned as an intellectual and social
network within the legislature, which wielded preponderant power in state
government. In the organizational vacuum that resulted from the lack of parties,
South Carolina College alumni formed the only statewide networks of politically
prominent men. Whatever else dueling involved, an important function of dueling
in South Carolinian politics was the routinization of charisma within this
elite. Politicians in the Palmetto State (and the students in the College) held
fast to the atavistic antiparty ideals of the Federalist era, and in the absence
of parties, dueling served as a token of status and political availability. The
duelist was the man of honor; the legitimate bearer of political power. Those
gentlemen who refused to duel on religious grounds lost social status and
political influence as a consequence. Despite the rules against dueling, South
Carolina College prepared its graduates to enter this unusual system of
self-identification.

The duel was more a test of character than marksmanship, and dueling did benefit
many alumni early in their political careers. Senator William Campbell Preston,
(’12), who eventually became president of the College, issued at least one
challenge during the Nullification Crisis. Congressman and Governor, George
McDuffie (’13), engaged in a series of spectacular duels in 1822 which helped
make him nationally prominent. Col. Cummings, his opponent was unscathed but
McDuffie was badly hurt. McDuffie’s honor was nonetheless vindicated. Young Mr.
Palmer, the student who had felt an obligation to challenge Dr. Cooper in 1822,
wrote approvingly of this duel, which happened about the same time. Congressman
and editor of the Charleston Mercury, Henry Laurens Pinckney (’14) was also a
successful duelist. James Henry Hammond (’25) early in his career challenged a
political opponent, but the affair was resolved without an exchange of shots.
Hammond, then a rising star of Nullification, "had clearly profited from the
publicity surrounding the incident." He threatened another duel when accused of
writing on his own behalf during his campaign for Governor. Daniel Huger (’25)
brought a pair of pistols with him to Columbia when he was first elected to the
legislature. He was so obviously interested in making a reputation for himself
as a duelist that he was required to post a bond not to break the peace even
before he had the opportunity to give or receive a challenge.

The patterns of education at South Carolina College forged the characteristic
“thymos” of the alumni. The ethos of honor and the absence of political parties
made for a volatile, ideologically radical political life. The same stubborn
independence and unwillingness to compromise matters of principle which were
publicized in the duel was to be found in the political views of the cognitive
elite produced by the College. The students of the period from 1830 to 1860 were
what Giles Patterson (’46) called "true sons of Carolina," men whose upbringing
and education were such that they had a siege mentality with regard to politics.
They generally came to political prominence between 1840 and 1865 as South
Carolina lurched from one crisis to another, and some reemerged to “redeem” the
state from 1876-1890. These men were generally born between 1815 and 1845, and
their earliest and most vivid memories of politics were doubtless the
declamations of their fathers, uncles and elder brothers about treacherous
Yankees who intended to destroy their society and impoverish their families.
Raised in an atmosphere of sectional antagonism surrounding Nullification, the
Bluffton movement, and the Secession Movement of 1850, these young men had no
memory of national politics apart from separatist cultural antagonism.

One sympathetic historian made the implicitly Hegelian argument that South
Carolina was imprisoned by its own idea of freedom:

Impelled by the circumstance of slavery, which had grown up without common
consent any leadership or even much thought beyond immediate profit, everybody
was forced to think and feel alike... No contrary leadership would have been
tolerated. The South Carolinian mind thus became combative rather than
constructive… [and] expended vast resources in the defense of an impossible
program in which success would have been the greatest calamity. The South
Carolina mind, therefore, though a powerful one, was not a free mind.

The alumni of South Carolina College were a social, economic, political and
intellectual elite. They believed themselves a moral elite with an obligation to
take political action. The conflicts with the federal government over taxes or
states rights or constitutional interpretation or censorship of mail were a
defense of South Carolina which was a defense of slavery which was a defense of
themselves. From the 1820s until 1861, the College was the hub for a network of
wealthy well-educated men who formed an ideological vanguard of proslavery
extremists with a political program that was actually or potentially
secessionist. The collegiate elite was very consistent over time. The College
alumni were intimately connected with Nullification and understood its
secessionist implications. In Congress, as alumni led the fight to impose the
“Gag rule” on slavery, while at home alumni were contributing to the
secessionist “Bluffton movement” of 1844. The “political correctness” of the
College was congruent with and reinforced the narrowing of political discussion
in the state as a whole.

Before the middle of the nineteenth century the spirit of compromise had been
wholly abandoned in South Carolina. The political elite were generally split
between Immediatists, those who advocated separate state secession without delay
and Cooperationists, those who wished to secede in cooperation with the other
states of the lower South so that the Civil War, assumed to follow inevitably,
would be more evenly matched. Although a few alumni remained Unionists, by
mid-century the overwhelmingly secessionist majority were merely divided as to
when and how to secede. The more prudent and sober Cooperationists prevailed for
a decade. The kamikaze mission proposed by the Immediatists was postponed until
1860. As one historian has noted, “[t]he secession movement was to be directed
by a revolutionary elite which was identical with the traditional ruling class.”
While most historical circumstances produced revolutionary underclasses if they
produce any class with revolutionary tendencies at all, antebellum South
Carolina was unique and noteworthy because it produced an anomalous
revolutionary ruling class. The members of the collegiate elite in antebellum
South Carolina were the Bolsheviks of reaction.

In one of the great understatements of the nineteenth century, Andrew Pickens
Butler (‘17) informed the United States Senate that “South Carolina has not
exactly shown the temper and disposition of what are commonly termed progressive
democracies.” At mid-century, when he spoke, more than half the population was
slaves, a large number of nonslaveholding whites were largely or completely
illiterate and the elite had committed themselves to an anachronistic political
theory, an intellectual cul de sac with disastrous practical implications.
Confederate General Martin Witherspoon Gary (‘52), receiving word of the events
at Appomattox, gave his command to a subordinate and rode off to find Jefferson
Davis and continue the struggle against the North. As he mounted his horse and
left the battlefield, he shouted defiantly, “South Carolinians never surrender.”

General Lee was a Virginian, and although he did surrender in 1865, most of the
alumni of the College returned home and continued to fight on to local victory.
A handful of men belonging to the Collegiate elite became scalawags during
Reconstruction. Most of the surviving alumni fought Reconstruction ferociously.
Gary (’52) was only one of the many alumni who helped “redeem” the state with a
campaign of racist terror carried out by paramilitary “gun clubs”. The
“Bourbons” who took power after the end of Reconstruction were drawn from the
elite of the ancien regime. Gary (’52), the architect of the white supremacist
regime inaugurated by the Democratic Party in 1876, did not surrender. He and
his comrades fought on and ultimately emerged victorious.
