---
src: https://michaelsugrue.substack.com/p/a-book-i-never-published-4c1
---

Chapter Five:

South Carolina College and the Construction of Southern Identity

“How is a history a priori possible? Answer: If the diviner creates and
contrives the events which he announces in advance.”

-Kant, The Strife of the Faculties

​	The alumni of South Carolina College were ambitious men and elites have
their own internal gradations. Not every alumnus had an equal chance to obtain
wealth and power within the state of South Carolina. Even for  College alumni,
the circle of “old families” could be very hard to  penetrate. As “A Carolinian”
noted,

​	The policy of Carolina has  been settled by established precedents; our
men, especially our young  men, of genius and enterprise, must seek elsewhere
the encouragement  denied them at home. It cannot be questioned that the most
distinguished sons of Carolina reside beyond its limits.... The case is
particularly  hard if the aspirant happens to be one of the people. He is
regarded as  an intruder into the higher ranks, and no amount of intellectual
and  moral worth will enable him to overleap the barrier which surrounds the
charmed circle of the "old families." Many a young scholar, young  lawyer, young
physician can bear testimony to the point. The hand of  arrogant opulence,
titular dignity, and antiquated fogyism has been laid upon them, and they have
either fought their way to distinction, or  retired in disgust to other states,
where, when they have at last  struggled up to an eminence which made them an
object of maternal pride, they have been hailed for the first time by their
unnatural mother, and felicitated for the honor of having been nurtured at her
bosom....

While this writer exaggerated when he stated that the “most distinguished  sons
of Carolina reside beyond her limits”, it is the case that the  rigid class
hierarchy in South Carolina drove off a substantial number  of vigorous young
alumni who prospered in the more fluid societies of  the Gulf states. Between
one thousand and fifteen hundred alumni of the  College left South Carolina for
Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana and Texas prior to the Civil War. Some
were the sons of prominent  Southern politicians who were simply returning home.

 Other  alumni moved to serially to several deep South states, speculated in
 land, and eventually returned to South Carolina. Between 1830 and 1860,  South
 Carolina led all states in the union in percentage of outmigrant  population.
 At mid-century, in Georgia, Alabama and Mississippi, almost a third of the
 resident population had been born on South Carolina.   Almost half of the
 alumni left the state, and these planters, ministers, doctors, editors and
 lawyers contributed to the development of a new  political elite in these
 nascent plantation societies. Those alumni who  settled permanently in the
 states of the lower South numbered  approximately one thousand. While their
 wealth, connections and  education drew many into political life and they
 wielded political  influence disproportionate to their small numbers, these
 alumni never  developed anything like the dominant political position they
 achieved  back in the Palmetto state. The political culture of the Gulf states
 was far more democratic, political parties were an distasteful but  unavoidable
 institutional impediment, and the spectrum of political  opinion was not as
 narrow as in South Carolina. Some alumni had  difficulties appealing to voters
 in their new communities, which made  their electoral successes sporadic.
 Nonetheless, as one contemporary in  Alabama noted, a small number of radical
 alumni sometimes held the  balance of legislative power in close contests:

Mr. Calhoun of  Dallas, Mr. Dixon H. Lewis …[were]… prominent leaders of that
wing known for years as the states rights or Nullification party…[this faction]
had existed since 1832, and while it never attained in numbers to the  control
of the state, it exerted no little influence on the “balance of  power”…the more
so, as it was made up mainly of gentlemen possessing a  high order of talent,
highly educated, wealthy, occupying high social  positions, and bold and decided
in the advocacy of measures and  principles in consonance with the feelings of
Southern men, especially  the younger ones…

​	Mr. Lewis had graduated in the class of  1820, Mr. Calhoun, (a nephew of
Senator Calhoun) was a member of the  class of 1824. They and other extremist
alumni who settled in the lower  South made the most of the limited electoral
successes they met there.  The alumni of South Carolina College who moved to the
Gulf made a  piquant addition to both the style and substance of lower South
politics, but except for the early years of each state and the crisis of the
1850s, they generally played a secondary rather than a leading  role. Apart from
occasionally holding the balance of power within state  legislatures, the
primary importance of alumni in the lower South was  more theoretical than
practical. They helped establish the terms and  parameters of political
discourse which defined the newly emergent  Southern political identity. Like
picadors goading a reluctant bull,  they drove their adopted states in the
direction of a disastrous  confederation in 1861 with the newly independent
republic of South  Carolina.

​	The alumni of South Carolina College influenced the  development of
political life from various positions throughout the  antebellum period. Alumni
were members of the first constitutional  conventions of Florida, Alabama,
Mississippi and Texas. They also served in the state legislatures of Texas,
Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama,  Florida and Georgia. Although alumni sometimes
lacked the common touch  necessary for elective office in the more democratic
political culture  of the Gulf States, a substantial number became prominent
jurists  because of their polished speech and superior claims to authentic legal
learning. Alumni served as Governors of Georgia, Florida, Alabama and
Mississippi. More than a dozen alumni were sent to Congress from  Georgia,
Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Texas.

In the  1820s, 30s and 40s alumni of the College were frequently regarded by
other Southerners as loose cannons, a small group of touchy South  Carolinians
with bad tempers and worse judgement. Congressman, later  Senator Dixon Lewis
(‘20) of Alabama impressed observers as having an  excessively antagonistic
spirit: “He is vehement and even violent in all his notions political or
otherwise, and on matters involving any  expression or argument of opinion he is
frequently harsh and unpleasant. He is too much of an enthusiast for a
philosopher and too much  prejudiced for deliberation.”  The conspicuous
vehemence of the alumni  was, with good reason, seen as threatening. On the
floor of Congress,  Congressman L.C. Levin (‘27) retorted that vehemence was a
legacy of  South Carolinian upbringing:

I cannot, however, refrain from  noticing the remarks of the honorable gentleman
from Pennsylvania, who  seems to have mistaken my vehemence for “menace”. With
me, sir, that  vehemence is constitutional. I was born in a sunny clime- in the
good  old state of South Carolina, whose sons, find them where you may, are
distinguished as much for magnanimity of heart as vehemence of manner.

In the lower south where the alumni generally settled, the alumni of the
College were too personally aloof and haughty, too ultra in their  political
thinking and too resistant to party discipline to be easy  candidates for
elective office.  The alumni left South Carolina with  some very old fashioned
ideas about what a gentleman could decently do  in public to obtain elective
office. As was the norm back in South  Carolina, some transplanted alumni were
reluctant to actively solicit  political positions. One of  James Dellet’s (10)
cronies in Alabama,  John Creach (’13) wrote “I have conversed with many
influential men here today- they will all support you…I wish that you would
consent to run.”  The fact that the alumni were raised in a political culture
which  treated electioneering as moral corruption sometimes made adapting to
the more democratic political norms of the lower South difficult. James  Dellett
(’10), who was eventually elected to Congress was urged by his  friends to be
less marmoreal in his political stance. One friend pleaded

…[Y]our name is before the people as a candidate for a seat in  Congress, in
opposition to Governor Murphy, (’08) but you have not even  given your hearty
consent that your friends should run you. I have long  been aware that
electioneering is repugnant to your feelings and has  never on any consideration
been submitted to, but my dear Sir, give your name freely, let me beg…

​	Certain relics of Federalist politics, particularly the reluctance to
accept party

discipline, disapproval of electioneering and an independent gentleman’s disgust
at

spoilsmanship distanced the alumni from mainstream of political life in the Gulf
states

and in the nation as a whole. Since alumni had been raised on the assumption
that much

of ordinary partisanship was corrupt, they often resisted party votes on
principle, and

defiantly refused support. One alumnus said in Congress:

In the remarks that I make I do not wish to be considered as compromising  the
Democratic party at all because I consider that I have an  individuality apart
from the Democratic party. I act with it when I  approve of its course; when I
do not I act for myself. I belong to the  Calhoun wing of the Democratic party.
I do not consider myself bound by  the action of the Democratic caucus, or as in
any way subject to the  dictation of the party.

This attitude was reflected in the  independence alumni showed in state level
partisan disputes. As one  contemporary noted “By a large number there was much
prejudice  entertained, especially among the masses, and what were termed flat
footed Democrats, against this class of politicians known as  Nullifiers.”
Despite the fact that they were a small minority in their  states, alumni
sometimes held a fragile balance of power precisely  because of their vexing
independence.

The antiparty inclination  of the alumni made them a mixed blessing in the
politics of the Lower  South. An eminent historian of Alabama wrote without
reference to  educational background that

…the accession of a small group of  states rights ideologues such as Dixon H.
Lewis  and James M. Calhoun   in 1838 seems to have guaranteed a… [Jacksonian
majority] …yet almost  from the beginning the Jacksonians found that they had
bought themselves trouble. The Lewis faction was difficult to control. Already
by 1840  the regular leaders talked longingly of expelling them from within
their ranks.

The fact that both Lewis (’20) and Calhoun (’24) were  College alumni made them
ideologically acute but practically unreliable. In the eyes of orthodox
partisans they were suspect because were  committed to ideas and reluctant to
compromise. Their ideological  commitments made them almost as much a hindrance
as a help because of  their open contempt for party discipline.

In the antebellum  period for most Americans party affiliation was second only
to religion  as the most important institutional affiliation and token of shared
identity. The identity of the alumni was constructed largely without  reference
to the idea of party, honor was far more important. Since  South Carolina did
not have the sort of two party system found in the  other Southern states, the
party allegiances of the transplanted alumni  were shallower, more transitory
and changeable than most. As fire-eating Congressman Lawrence Keitt (‘43)
publicly insisted, “I am bound by  strong ties to no party organization. I go
into no caucuses, and I am  bound by no party decisions.”  They often bolted
from one party to  another, and the party they left often felt as much relief as
loss.

The most complicated changes of party can be found in the career of  Congressman
Henry Hilliard (‘26) of Alabama, who zigzagged from Whig to  Know Nothing to
Democrat. Governor Gayle (‘13) of Alabama flipped the  other way, from Democrat
to Whig. Dixon Lewis, (‘20) was elected to  Congress as a Democrat, but started
out as a Whig. In Georgia, Governor  McDonald (‘16) left the Whig party to join
the Democrats as well.  Although odd cases like Congressman Levin’s (‘27)
movement from  Democratic to Know Nothing can be found, the trend, as in the
case of  Cotesworth Pinckney Smith (‘20) and John Starke Hunter (‘17), who
represented Mississippi and Alabama respectively at the Nashville  Convention,
was from Whig to Democrat to Confederate. The ease with  which alumni switched
party suggests that a greater attachment to other  identifying values. The
alumni identified with a region, the South, and  an institution, slavery, not a
party. They were contemptuous of mass  democracy, of party organizations and of
those who controlled them.  Except during the earliest organizational phases of
political life,  ordinary citizens and stalwarts of both parties generally found
the  alumni and their fire-eating associates too extreme in their rhetoric  and
proposals. The alumni were most prominent early and late in the  antebellum
period; their ascendancy was frequently thwarted by the  strength of the second
political party system. They were conspicuous at  the time when each of the Gulf
states entered the union, but became less prominent as each state routinized its
political life. Their hour for  leadership came when the second political party
system collapsed in the  1850s.

With the exception of Louisiana, which had a long  established elite, the alumni
filled a vacuum of leadership early in the history of about to be admitted or
newly admitted Gulf states.  Initially, these frontier areas had very few
educated men. Some of the  earliest alumni of South Carolina College had moved
to the frontier  areas of the lower South while these states were still
territories. For  the young men who left the College for the Gulf States, timing
was an  important determinant in where they would settle. Louisiana, Alabama and
Mississippi were admitted into the Union between 1812 and 1819, Florida and
Texas in 1845. For the first classes, Alabama and Mississippi were  the most
attractive destinations; later Florida and then Texas were the  most frequently
chosen. Although the well established elite in New  Orleans somewhat diminished
the attractiveness of Louisiana to ambitious early alumni moving west,
Mississippi drew particularly large numbers  of alumni very early on, both as
land speculators and plantation owners. The same was later true of Florida, and
in the 1850s, Texas. Early  arrival gave transplanted alumni with ready cash
access to choice land,  which was essential to wealth in a plantation society.
In addition,  while governmental institutions were still in flux, the education
and  eloquence of these young men sometimes gave opportunities for public
office. Often they helped draft these new state constitutions. The early date at
which alumni of South Carolina College moved west gave them an  influence on the
nascent political culture disproportionate to their  small numbers.

​	When alumni arrived in a new territory, they made an impact; people
could not help but notice them. Most of the early  graduates who left for the
Gulf states were conspicuously well educated  young gentlemen in their twenties.
I.W. Hayne (‘27) reported that “…I  had the reputation in Alabama of being a
cold, calculating, selfish man  of high honor and honesty but without impulse or
sympathy.”  The alumni  were intellectually and temperamentally different from
most of the early settlers, and they sometimes bulldozed their way to political
power and wealth in these early communities by a combination of ready wit, force
of personality, and reputation for violence. One contemporary described  the
impression made on the local court by one young man, “Jim T.”, who  was
probably, but not certainly an alumnus of South Carolina College.   Attracted by
the “flush times” in Mississippi, this young lawyer began a flamboyant practice.
He was described as a

… a goodly youth  from the Republic of South Carolina, Jim T. by name. The
elders tried  his mettle…but [he] stood up to them like a man. … Jim was equal
to any  of them in law knowledge and talent, and superior in application and
self confidence, if the last could justly be said of mere humanity. He  rode
over us rough shod…He was the best lawyer of his age I had ever  seen. He had
accomplished himself in the elegant science of special  pleading -had learned
all the arts of confusing a case by all manner of  pleas and motions.

The only institution in South Carolina where a young man like Jim T. would have
been likely to develop such eloquence  and learning was South Carolina College.
The arrogant bluster and  punctilious politeness displayed in the courtroom were
also frequently  seen characteristics in the behavior of alumni. The combination
of  flashy rhetoric, charismatic personality and willingness to duel often  gave
alumni considerable advantage over less polished opponents.

​	Upon entering the log courthouse of an illeducated local judge, Jim T.
began badgering him over legal technicalities of which the judge was  hopelessly
ignorant. In a supercilious and belligerent tone, Jim T.  threatened a
countersuit for malicious and groundless legal action, more than suggesting that
the judge was incompetent. Using an intimidating  vocabulary and mysterious
Latin terms he ranted with exquisite courtesy. One observer recalled Jim T.
hectoring the judge with remarkable  politeness, he “threw himself into a
passion. “Well,” said he, with  freezing dignity- “I see, sir, that you have put
the common counts in  this declaration…Don’t you know that the statute requires
the cause of  action to be endorsed on the capias ad respondendum? I…move to
strike  out all these counts as multifarious and incongruous and
heterogeneous.”” Flustered and not knowing how to proceed, the judge  threw out
the otherwise legitimate action and Jim T.’s client prevailed. Satisfied after
the favorable ruling, he smugly remarked to the  overmatched judge, “Now, that
is doing the thing in the regular way. See how pleasant it is to get on with
business when the rules are  observed!”    Jim T.’s bravado won him an
undeserved victory, and he was not the only alumnus to achieve conspicuous
success in dubious cases.  Throughout the lower South, despite the fact that
they were never  numerous, alumni used their superior education and bellicose
temperaments to gain political advantage.

​	Those who left South  Carolina generally did so because their ambitions
were thwarted at home  and greater opportunity beckoned from the lower South.
Insufficient  family connections variously combined with wanderlust, exhausted
soil  and personal misbehavior to push some alumni from their native state.
Simultaneously, the good lands, advantageous marriages, wealth and  political
power open to them in the lower South were powerful  attractions that pulled Jim
T. and many like him toward the Gulf. Alumni of the College who moved to the
lower South often found that their  intellectual capital and rhetorical
abilities commanded a greater  premium there than they had at home. Like
Faulkner’s Thomas Sutpen, but  with more education and polished manners, these
ambitious young men  moved from one state to another, accumulating wealth and
connections,  refusing to settle down until they had slaked their thirst for
land,  slaves and power. One such alumnus, Robert Spencer (’23), moved from
South Carolina to Alabama, then moved Mississippi to cash in on the  “flush
times”. He wrote back to South Carolina advising other young men  to do
likewise.

Let me say to you frankly that I think you would  act unwisely to let the
prospect of any office in your district divert  your mind for a moment from the
West. For I doubt not your chance for  office of profit would be better here
than in So Ca. People in coming to a new country do not often bring with them a
large train of family  connections, and consequently family influence is
scarcely felt at all  in our elections. To use a homely phrase “every tub stands
on its own  bottom”. A man’s supposed merits are his passport to office with us:
and that you possess merit which would place office, if desired, within  your
reach within this country I have not a doubt.

Alumni in the  Gulf States could establish themselves as local squires by making
an  advantageous marriage, developing a professional practice and or a
plantation, and entering political life. Their early political  indoctrination
pushed them toward fateful national issues because they  came to the lower South
with an ideological frame for the political big  picture. Unlike most settlers,
they were accomplished orators, they had a readymade vocabulary of political
praise and blame and they thought  generally and in terms of principle. The
College alumni were more  sectionally minded than most politicians, in some ways
analogous to the  “continental mindedness” of the late eighteenth century
Federalists that they often resembled.  They emphasized federal relations more
than  their opponents, who were usually to a greater degree localists.

The more cosmopolitan alumni who were elected to state legislatures in the
lower South were somewhat alienated by what they may have perceived as  other
legislators pettiness and ignorance of the larger sectional  issues. When Robert
B. Campbell (‘09), former Congressman from South  Carolina moved to Alabama, he
was elected to the state legislature, but  he never became an insider. As one
contemporary noted, “He appeared to  be somewhat out of place in the House, and
though surrounded by much  intelligence in his fellow members, he looked
solitary and abstracted,  from the want of congenial natures to grapple with in
the forum of  legislation….   Once in office, alumni like Campbell (‘09) were
often  more concerned with setting the terms of debate and political strategy
for federal relations than in enacting prosaic local legislation, and  they were
uneasy with partisan spoilsmanship. As one historian of  Alabama noted, the
state legislators “Usually they found themselves,  when attention turned to
complicated national affairs, at the mercy of  those men who, because of
superior academic attainments, affected to  understand such things”.  Alumni of
South Carolina College, although  only a tiny handful in each state legislature,
could be counted on as  claiming such expertise. This is why they eventually
turned up in every  secession convention in the lower South.

​	The alumni were a  self-consciously radical regional elite. After
leaving South Carolina,  most of those educated at the College continued to
entertain the extreme proslavery, secessionist opinions inculcated there,
although those who  held elective office necessarily modified the expression of
these views  to suit their new circumstances. Dixon Lewis (’20) who served as a
Congressman and Senator from Alabama, mastered the idiom of Gulf state  politics
yet maintained the same vocabulary and pan Southern assumptions as did the
nullifiers of South Carolina. During a Nullification meeting in Columbia, a
letter from Lewis (’20) was read with the following  toast “South Carolina- her
course is the course of the whole South. Her  defeat would prove a death blow to
Southern Liberty”  Apart from alumni  of the College, such opinions were scarce
outside of South Carolina.   During the Nullification crisis, one of the few
Congressman not elected  from South Carolina who consistently supported the
nullifiers was Lewis  (‘20).  He articulated the same militant vision of a South
united in the defense of slavery that the congressmen from South Carolina did.
Virtually alone among Congressmen not representing the Palmetto state,  Lewis
predicted in 1832 a unified Southern struggle with the North:

…I will not even discuss this great question of Southern wrongs as an
Alabamian, but as a southern man, completely identified in feeling and  interest
with that oppressed portion of the Union south of the Potomac…  Gentlemen on
this floor believe that excitement, if not the opposition,  to this system in
the South, is confined to South Carolina, and that it  has been produced by
disaffected politicians. …Let gentlemen not deceive themselves into the belief
that the other Southern states can or will  separate from South Carolina in the
common struggle for their common  rights, whatever apparent differences there
may be as to the manner in  which this struggle shall commence.

Lewis’ statement was not  descriptive but performative. He was constructing a
Southern identity. A collective identity is an all too temporal accumulation of
such  incantations.

​	Transplanted South Carolinians were so  conspicuous in their allegiance
to the Palmetto state and its diaspora  and their political views were so
predictable that their excesses became something of a joke among other residents
of the Gulf states. One  Mississippian noted that transplanted South Carolinians
unintentionally  came close to caricaturing themselves and he referred to them
as  comically “South Carolinaish”.

I have a preacher in one of the  circuits in my district who is a So. Carolinian
and was raised in  Darlington District (Rev Geo. F. Thompson) who has become a
preacher  since he came to the West. He amused me a few weeks ago by showing how
South Carolinaish he is. At one of my Quarterly Meetings I was somewhat  in
doubt as to who should be appointed to preach to the colored people  when he
named a preacher who was a stranger to me and on my making some  inquiries as to
his character and qualifications he made only this  reply, “O sir he from South
Carolina.” He seemed really to think that  that was quite recommendation enough.

Transplanted South  Carolinians used Palmetto state origin as a token of
reliably proslavery political views. If a gentleman from South Carolina were to
preach to  slaves, it could be safely assumed that he would focus on St. Paul
rather than Exodus.

​	In 1851, while travelling in Alabama, Oscar  Lieber ('49) wrote home to
his father, a professor at the College, about the homogeneity of the political
beliefs held by the alumni he met as  he traveled throughout the lower South:

Our College certainly  holds the highest position among southern institutions of
the kind and  most men who graduate are above the average intellect of the
country...they spread over the whole broad acres of the South and yet  whenever
you meet a graduate of our College, you can be sure, yes 50 to 1 that he is
strong in his political faith and that that faith is of the  right sort. It
would be interesting if it could be ascertained , for  instance, what number of
her alumni were Know Nothings. I feel confident not more than 5% were of that
party and not more than 20% were  indifferent. So regular is this similarity of
opinion that a priori I  should never hesitate to speak to them, but as if they
had already  expressed it.

The political faith of transplanted alumni was  predictable, homogeneous and
very “South Carolinaish”. It is noteworthy  that alumni like Lieber (’49), armed
with a diploma and letters of  introduction, had no problem finding other alumni
who might offer them  hospitality, introductions to the local gentry, or useful
influence with other alumni politicians. The formidable influence of this “old
boys  network” extended throughout the Gulf states back to South Carolina to
Washington itself.

​	The alumni had overlapping social and  intellectual and professional and
political and marital connections  which formed an elaborate network with a hub
in South Carolina.  Congressman James Dellett ('10) of Alabama corresponded with
at least  sixty alumni in five lower South states. Senator James Henry Hammond
('25) of South Carolina corresponded with over one hundred scattered  throughout
the South. The network formed by College alumni was  extensive, durable, and
operated across generations. One Floridian  illustrated the value of College
connections in a letter to his  classmate, Congressman William Colcock ('23),
whom he had not seen or  spoken to in three decades. The letter, which requested
patronage for a  young friend, who was an alumnus of the College, began:

After the  lapse of thirty years I claim the privilege of a College friendship
by  introducing you to my friend J. Cannaway Smith, Esq. (‘38) of Florida, a
leading member of the Democratic party and a prominent member of the  Bar. You
are too well acquainted with the public men of our state to be  reminded that
Mr. Smith was one of the Electors in the late Presidential Canvass- The high and
responsible offices of  trust which he has filled in Florida afford the best
evidence of the distinguished position which he occupies at home both as a
gentleman and a politician- Mr. Smith is a native of South Carolina and like
ourselves was once a student of the  College at Columbia. I can only add that he
is a worthy representative  of his chivalrous state.

​	The formidable power of the  attachments made in the College were
political as well as personal. In  1833, during the Nullification Controversy,
James Dellett (’10) was  urged to run for Congress against former Governor, and
fellow University of Alabama Trustee, John Murphy ('08), but he declined. He had
known  Murphy in College, and even though they had considerable political
differences, they had reached an accommodation. In a letter, Dellett  (’10)
revealed the quiet power of alumni political connections when he  wrote that he
had already confidentially agreed with Murphy (’08) not to run against him.

​	The most politically influential alumni had a  tangled web of
connections across the South. One interstate lawsuit that lasted from 1832 to
1837 particularly illustrates the complexity of the alumni network. Four alumni
claimed ownership of some land in  Mississippi. From Alabama, James Dellett
(’10) wrote his brother in law  Thomas Willisson (’13) inquiring about his
“intention you say you have  of leaving Carolina for Florida…” further asking
“Have you said anything to our friends on the Mississippi respecting the little
portion of land we are entitled to there?”  Mr. Dellett (‘10) of Alabama and Mr.
Willisson (‘13) of South Carolina were forced to sue Mr. Stark (‘10) of  South
Carolina and Col. Whitner (‘09) of Florida over this disputed  Mississippi real
estate. Stark (’10) and Whitner (’09) were represented  by the firm of Wardlaw
(‘16) and Wardlaw (‘18) plus Maxcy Gregg (‘33).  Dellett and Willisson were
represented by J.L. Petigru (‘09) and William Henry De Sassure.

Some elements of the nation’s political  destiny are visible here in compressed
form, with various alumni from  lower South states entangled in a dispute which
began in South Carolina. The aged Mr. DeSassure was one of the founders of the
College that  everyone else attended. Mr. Petigru (‘09) was notorious as one of
a  handful of alumni opposed to secession in 1860, while the secessionist  Gregg
(‘33) was a leader in the movement to reopen the slave trade in  the 1850s. He
joined the Wardlaw brothers (‘16 and’18, valedictorians of their respective
classes) at South Carolina’s secession convention. In  1860, Frank Wardlaw (‘18)
drafted the Ordinance of Secession, and in  1865, David Wardlaw (’16) drafted
the “Black Code”. Despite the conflict of political opinions and legal
maneuvers, and seven years of high  legal fees it took for Dellett (’10) and
Willisson (’13) to prevail, the parties involved has gone to College together,
and the controversy was  marked by the most exacting politeness. Dellett (’10),
the eventual  winner, wrote to his old classmate Stark (‘10) that their lawsuit
was  not a personal affront. “The above is in answer to your letter and I
assure you is intended in all kindness, my interest in the land properly
considered can never disturb the recollections of early days”

​	 The network of College connections reverberated from one state to
another and back to South Carolina. William Harper (‘08), who was a  proslavery
apologist in the late 1820s and later drafted the Ordinance  of Nullification,
resumed after a hiatus of many years his  correspondence with Alabama
Congressman James Dellett (‘10)

Do you remember (as I do very well) that in our early correspondence we agreed
that however long our intercourse by letter by letter might be  interrupted we
should not consider it as broken off, but to be resumed  whenever our feelings
or occasion might prompt us. And I now write [to  ask] that you pay us a visit….
You will find that all my children have  been from their infancy familiar with
your name as a household word and  will at once regard you as an old friend…

Another alumnus, Charleston lawyer J.L. Petigru (‘09) wrote to Dellett (‘10) in
a similar

vein, emphasizing the continuity of collegiate friendships across space and
time.

It gives me great pleasure to think we are engaged in a correspondence  once
more and that we understand each other on the all engrossing topics of the day.
It shows that tho’ the intercourse of boyhood has been long interrupted there
was a foundation in nature for the close intimacy  which subsisted between us
when we were in College…

The  correspondence between alumni allowed for frank discussions of land,
cotton, family news and of course, politics. Ben Whitner, (‘09)  corresponded
from his plantation outside Tallahassee with numerous  alumni, but he was
particularly pleased with the letters and newspapers  he exchanged with James
Henry Hammond (‘25), because Hammond was the  source as well as the object of
much choice gossip. He wrote,  “I am  always gratified to get your letters,
because they always contain  something of interest, when you discuss your
movements or interests as a planter- or give me a touch of the times in
politicks [sic], but most  of all when you entertain me with items of family
gossip.”  In exchange, Whitner (‘09) kept Hammond (‘25) informed about politics
in Florida and exchanged family gossip too.  Both Whitner and Hammond knew
intimately  the maneuvering of political elites in their respective states and
they  exchanged personal information that newspaper editors did not dare to
provide. Of course, extremist politics figured very prominently in the
correspondence between alumni, and they kept each other informed about  their
localities and their specific areas of expertise. Dr. Josiah Nott  (‘24), the
scientific racist from Mobile, Alabama, wrote to Hammond  (‘25) that “The nigger
business has brought me a large and heterogeneous correspondence” and he
recommended to Hammond books that he regarded as indispensable for proslavery
agitation.  Hammond, in turn, supported  Nott’s polygenetic theories and
insisted that proslavery politics needed a scientific foundation.  A Drew Gilpin
Faust has noted, “The personal  ties among proslavery writers arose in great
part from the small size of the intellectual class in the South; most of its
members were  acquainted with one another either directly or through mutual
friends,  and their social interactions from the 1830s onward reinforced the
similarities in their thought.”

Other colleges had varying  degrees of influence on the political life of the
antebellum Gulf  states, but none could match South Carolina College. The alumni
of the  college entered the embryonic elites in the lower South at a crucially
early time in their development and no other institution put so much  influence
in so few hands. The University of North Carolina, the College of Charleston,
William and Mary and the University of Georgia were  Southern colleges that
predated South Carolina College, and the  antebellum faculty in these
institutions included prominent political  extremists and their alumni included
some conspicuous fire-eaters.   However, these colleges had chronic financial
difficulties which insured that, compared with South Carolina College, the
number of matriculants  remained small, and the faculties were relatively
undistinguished and  plagued by high turnover. Moreover within their respective
states, none  of these institutions offered rewards as tangible as those
associated  with South Carolina College because they lacked the ubiquitous
political influence wielded by alumni in South Carolina. Still less influential
were the alumni of the ill endowed and academically weak denominational
colleges that proliferated during the antebellum period.  The only elite
Southern institution which generated an alumni network whose influence  could be
compared with the alumni of South Carolina College was the  University of
Virginia.

Despite its substantial and continuous  funding and its considerable prestige,
Mr. Jefferson’s university never  exercised the same degree of influence on Gulf
state politics that South Carolina College did.  While a handful of students
matriculated at both Columbia and Charlottesville, the overlap was small. One
important  difference was that the students at Charlottesville usually completed
only the first part of the curriculum. One historian has noted that that while
both institutions catered to a slaveholding elites, “Patterns of  attendance
differed markedly … most Virginia students attended only for  the freshman or
sophomore years, but South Carolina … almost eliminated  the freshman year, so
that most of its students were juniors and  seniors. It is thus likely that
South Carolina College had the greater  impact.”  Not only did students at South
Carolina College complete more  advanced elements of the hyperpoliticized
curriculum, they left South  Carolina at a critically early date, starting in
1806, before Mr.  Jefferson’s institution even opened its doors. The University
of  Virginia did not begin admitting students until 1821. By that time  alumni
of South Carolina College had already been elected to Congress  and held
prominent positions in the newly organized governments of  Alabama and
Mississippi. Proslavery agitation by alumni had begun even  before the
University of Virginia had a graduating class.

The  alumni of the College had particularly close ties to the new  institutions
of higher learning that developed in the lower South.  Because only a few
antebellum residents of the Gulf states had a college education, alumni
gravitated toward service as faculty and trustees.  Those alumni who served as
professors or trustees in Georgia, Alabama,  Mississippi or Louisiana often
introduced a political dimension into  disciplines like belles lettres or
medicine which were not directly  related to politics. The scientific racist
Josiah Nott (‘24) was a  lecturer at the University of New Orleans, whose
discussions of anatomy  directly fed into racist musings on comparative crania,
which in his  view established the necessity of slavery, which entailed the
necessity  of secession. As the antebellum period came to a close, the relation
between South Carolina College and the new Gulf state colleges became  more
reciprocal: the college in Columbia eventually drew faculty from  the
universities of Mississippi, Alabama and Georgia.

South  Carolina College was particularly associated with the University of
Alabama. Rev. Basil Manly (‘20), who had made such an admirable fight  against a
knife wielding classmate, was the president of the University  of Alabama for
more than twenty years. Manly offered to alumni  politicians with reliably
extreme political views the opportunity to  speak on campus, simultaneously
promoting both men and ideas.  In  addition, he solicited alumni politicians to
obtain suggestions for new  faculty members who has suitably sectionalist,
proslavery political  beliefs.

 The existence of political litmus tests and  recruitment through the alumni
 network favored graduates of South  Carolina College. Manly (’20) assembled at
 Tuscaloosa very capable  professors like Henry Hilliard (‘26) who was
 eventually sent to Congress from Alabama, and Richard T. Brumby (‘24) who
 edited the extremist  Tuscaloosa States Rights Expositor, (and later became a
 professor at  South Carolina College). He thus insured that higher education in
 Alabama had a radical political tinge which the Trustees would find  congenial.
 Judge Lesene (‘32), Congressman James Dellett (’10),  Governor John Gayle
 (‘13), Congressman Dixon Lewis (’19), Governor John  Murphy (‘08) all served as
 Trustees of the University of Alabama. The  roster of Trustees contained enough
 South Carolina College alumni so  that meetings became rather clubby. Former
 Governor Murphy (’08) wrote  Congressman Dellett (’10) that “I called at your
 office shortly after  you set out, hearing in the morning that you intended to
 leave for  Tuscaloosa in the course of the day. I had hoped that the Trustees
 would meet during the session of the Supreme Court, but Governor Gayle (’13)
 has informed me that the Board will not meet.”

​	Local elites in  the lower South knew that South Carolina College
produced a large number of politically influential figures. When Alabama Senator
Dixon Lewis  (’20) died, he was eulogized as being among the most capable man
among a collection of very capable men associated with the College. His
eulogist remembered that in 1819 as he was about to graduate, “…the  president,
Dr. Maxcy having died during his senior year, Mr. Lewis was  selected by his
class to deliver a eulogy upon his character.  Considering the great ability of
that class is even to this day marked  in the annals of that noble College,
these were no inconsiderable honors to have achieved.  The writer noted that six
of Lewis’ classmates (of a class of forty nine) had been sent to Congress. The
small number of men who were educated at South Carolina College cropped up
surprisingly  often in elite circles as they developed in the Gulf states.

​	The  influence of the College began more than half a century before the
Civil War. R.R. Reid (’08) who had, as a Congressman from Georgia, predicted
that civil war would be the consequence of the Missouri Compromise,  later
became the territorial Governor of Florida. His classmate, John  Murphy (’08)
became Governor of Alabama, and other contemporaries, such  as Anderson Crenshaw
(’06), a justice of the Alabama Supreme court,  occupied similarly high posts.
One historian noted that the South  Carolina College class of 1808 was an
especially brilliant class, but  only primus inter pares. “The members of these
first classes were an  exceedingly talented group of young men… The rolls are
replete with  names that became prominent in the history of the state and to a
lesser  extent the entire South. The class of 1808, for example, [which had
fifty two alumni] was to furnish three United States Senators, three  Governors,
several brilliant judges and others who took high places in  their professions.”
The earliest classes, which produced scores of  prominent political figures,
were also remarkable for the “strikingly  large proportion …[who] soon migrated
to the new western states after  graduation… A steady migration of  some of the
finest men that the state produced took place, especially to Alabama and
Mississippi. South  Carolina could ill afford to export brains…”

The brain drain of   South Carolina College alumni shaped the development of the
local elites in the Gulf states. As one geographer of American culture has
noted,  “the most critical form of cultural diffusion was carried on by those
pioneer settlers who established the first truly effective settlements  in
various parts of the country”. This is as true for the earliest elite elements
in the Black Belt as it is for yeomen in the upcountry.  Certain peculiar views
of government and society diffused from South  Carolina College to the half
formed antebellum elites in the lower  South. South Carolina College was one of
only “a very few centers of  active cultural ferment, of invention and
elaboration, which acted as  culture hearths, or in some cases funnels, from
which local or exotic  innovations spread over extensive areas during or after
the period of  frontier settlement.”  South Carolina College funneled a
particular  tradition of political culture into the nascent elite of the Gulf
states, which is why the very limited support which South Carolinian  political
doctrines received in the 1830s and 1840s was largely limited  to radical
enclaves in lower South states with active alumni networks.

​	Geographical concentration helped networks develop. Many of the alumni
were planters who prospered in the alluvial soils of the Black Belt.  Those
alumni whose primary occupation was lawyer, editor, doctor or  professor were
clustered in cities, especially state capitals and  college towns. South
Carolina College alumni formed the largest and most cohesive elite network in
the lower South and they self consciously  worked with one another to create a
Southern identity. The largest and  most important elite network in the lower
south was made up of South  Carolina College alumni, and as the antebellum
period wore on, they  voiced increasingly strident separatist sympathies and
southern  identification. From the pulpit, the courtroom, the editor’s desk and
the legislature they iterated and reiterated their idiosyncratic  political
ideas throughout the antebellum period. This helped erode the  plausibility of
more moderate political views and destroy the political  center. They were
catalysts to civil war.

​	Less conspicuous but  perhaps practically more important than a few
score high ranking  officials were the hundreds of alumni who served in local
political  offices such as county judges or prosecutors, mayors of cities like
Shreveport, Macon, Montgomery, Gainesville and Savannah. Not only did  alumni
make a mark in state and national public office, as local  notables they also
influenced at the grassroots level religion and  education and medicine, and the
prestige they developed in these areas  lent plausibility to their only
tangentially related national political  views. Since politics and journalism
were so intimately connected,  alumni were also of necessity heavily dyed with
printer’s ink. Alumni  editors kept in close connection with their friends at
home by swapping  newspapers and reprinting the most ardent sectionalist
propaganda. The  network of alumni who edited newspapers in South Carolina
eventually  extended throughout the lower South.

​	Editorial control of  newspapers and magazines was the most important
means by which alumni,  both within and without South Carolina, agitated the
sectional issues  which led to civil war. Radical politics was expounded in
magazines like the Southern Quarterly Review and extremist newspapers emanating
from  South Carolina. Such papers as the Charleston Mercury and the Columbia
Telescope were the self described “voice of South Carolina”, which  alumni often
treated as being the voice of the South.  The alumni who  edited papers in the
lower South amplified this voice. The editor of the Charleston Mercury appealed
to advertisers by offering them a  opportunity to examine his subscription
lists, claiming “a large  circulation in all districts of the state, not just
cities but rural  areas as well.” Moreover, he stated that the same pattern held
true of  subscribers in Alabama and Georgia.  One observer of politics in
Alabama emphasized the importance of the extremist press in his locality. He
wrote that “They are all violent Fire Eaters, are for dissolution to a  man, and
speak of any one who professes the smallest love of union, as a traitor to his
country, namely the South. … the cause of half of the  violence in public
opinion here is their ignorance of politics; they  never see any papers but the
local papers and the “Charleston Mercury””

​	Some of the most extreme of the local papers in the lower South were
edited by alumni who were specifically recruited to radicalize the editorial
opinions expressed. Early in the political development of the Gulf states,
alumni, alone and in concert, strove to gain control of  key newspapers and to
install reliably radical men in the editors desks, so as to favorably mold
public opinion. In 1830, as the Nullification  controversy raged, and South
Carolina received practically no  encouragement from any other state, alumni
tried to manufacture support. Congressman, later Senator Dixon Lewis (’20) of
Alabama, wrote James  Henry Hammond (‘25), who was at that time a newspaper
editor in Columbia considering a move to the Gulf states, that

I am happy to  learn that a new country is more congenial to your interests than
Carolina, not only because of my good wishes to you personally, but from a
conviction that the new states have much to gain from the migration  of educated
and aspiring young men carrying with them (what is of all  things most needed)
correct political principles. … As to the politics  of the country it can hardly
be said to have assumed any definite form.  We are in the ABC of states rights
doctrines as Carolina was in  1823…There are 12 or 15 papers and not more than 2
are avowedly for  states rights… the Huntsville Democrat is very wild on many
subjects.  The other, the Alabama Journal, is printed in Montgomery. I should be
very glad if you could get control of that paper. There are a dozen  public
spirited and wealthy planters in the neighborhood who would  willingly advance
the means.”

Lewis (’20) was an alumnus,  Hammond (‘25) was an alumnus, and it would be very
surprising if the  dozen planters bankrolling this scheme did not also have
college  connections. Hammond did not accept Lewis’ offer, but Lewis helped make
sure that the Alabama Journal was eventually taken over by another  fire-eater
Thomas Mays (’26).

Alumni were closely associated with radical newspapers, and their policy of
exchanging papers and  reprinting political opinion pieces amplified their
extremist political  views throughout the lower South as it had within the
Palmetto state. In and out of South Carolina, alumni editors vied with one
another in  scratching each others’ journalistic backs. The Charleston Mercury
lavished praise on and sought subscriptions for the Tuscaloosa States  Rights
Expositor, the Alabama Journal, and other publications edited by  fire eating
alumni. They in turn regularly reprinted content from the  Mercury and praised
the paper for its stalwart sectionalism.

Even alumni who were not editors regularly exchanged newspapers for the
edification of themselves and their circle of friends. Floridian B.F.  Whitner
(‘09) wrote to Hammond (‘25), saying, “I get no politicks from  anyone else on
So Ca than yourself…” and offering to exchange the  Florida Star for the Augusta
Mirror. Whitner also asked Hammond (’25) to send livestock this Fall “by some of
the emigrants”, which suggests the regularity of their interstate contacts.  The
scientific racist, Josiah Nott (‘24), wrote Hammond (‘25) in 1845 from Mobile
Alabama, praising  his latest proslavery publication, the Clarkson Letters.
Since he had  only read an abridgement of Hammond’s work in the Mercury, Nott
asked  for unabridged copies on behalf of some local editors who wanted to
reprint them.  Other alumni chose to write their own propaganda for  local
consumption. Alabamian Thomas Woodward (‘26) was described by a  contemporary as
having

…adopted the extreme notions of the  political majority of his native state
which found a practical  expression in 1861…He was a good writer, and
contributed many articles  to the press, advocating his favorite notions of
government. A series of these appeared in one of the Montgomery papers about the
year 1848 or  1850, over the signature of “Lyon” which attracted a good deal of
attention. He held many notions about government which were not popular  with
the masses of his day, which however he seldom made public, but  communicated in
private intercourse with his friends…

The  political culture of South Carolina was far less democratic than any  other
state and those alumni who hoped to win wide popular support had  to make
concessions to the general public or at least maintain a prudent silence as
Woodward (‘26) usually did. The alumni who agitated for  secession through the
medium of newspapers extended into the 1840s and  1850s the rhetoric and goals
of the extremists who had conspired with  Thomas Cooper in the 1830s.

By mid-century, fire-eating alumni who edited prominent newspapers in the lower

South were intent on realizing the conspiratorial aspirations that had been
cherished earlier by their teachers. J.J. Siebels (’36), the editor of  the
Montgomery Advertiser and State Gazette wrote to James Henry Hammond (‘25)
hoping to organize the actions of like minded gentlemen so as to  catalyze
secession.

I enclosed your address in yesterday’s  “Advertiser and State Gazette”, the
editorial columns of which are under my control… I am firmly of the opinion that
such states as SC, Ga, Va,  Ala, Fla, and Miss in fact the whole South can no
longer remain in the  union without dishonor and disgrace. I am for leaving it
at once while  we still have the power. I should be rejoiced to know if SC, my
native  state if no other would accompany her at the time [would] leave the
union…her counsel would sooner or later be followed, most especially if  the
general government should attempt to put her down, which I should  prefer as
affording us a rallying point and an excuse for following  suit. Those of us who
expect to do battle in her cause should be advised at once… Should you have the
good fortune to take Ga with you, so much  the better, for that would at once
determine the course of this state,  Florida and Miss, but let SC act if no
other state does.

​	Siebels hoped that the conspiratorial activities of secessionist editors
like  himself could be broadened to include a wider range of Southern
nationalists, many of whom, like Hammond, had ties to South Carolina  College.
He hoped to reinforce the efforts of extremist editors by  working with the far
more numerous gentlemen who, as local notables,  could influence public opinion
at the community level.

There has  been little, far too little communication kept up between the
Southern  men of the different states to enable us to move harmoniously toward
the accomplishment of the great object. It has been left mostly to the
press-when perhaps private correspondence might have accomplished as  much if
not more. …[P]erhaps I should apologize for addressing you this  letter, as you
perhaps have no recollection of having seen me, though I  remember you well,
when at school and in College  at Columbia from 1832  to 1837. P.S. Mass
meetings are to come off on the 26 inst and 3rd prox  are give by the committees
of Dallas and Lowndes counties. I have been  invited to address both and shall…
put the resistance ball in motion.”

​	Hammond, gratified by Siebels’ letter and sympathetic to his proposals,
agreed that “SC will ultimately have to take the lead in seceding.”   The
network of alumni editors who agitated sectional issues strove to  insure that
the lower South would follow the lead of the Palmetto state. A prominent
historian of Alabama noted that “The fire eater groups each centered about a
town- ordinarily a county seat- and each supported a  press to elucidate its
ideas.”  This was true mutatis mutandis of all  the Gulf states, and many alumni
edited papers which were focal points  for separatist political agitation. Often
these papers printed and  reprinted content written by ministers and educators
and politicians who were also College alumni. Just before the Civil War, when
the political crisis they had helped foment catapulted many alumni into
political  prominence, alumni politicians revealed many similarities in their
use  of the press to catalyze secession.

In 1859 William McWillie  (‘17) was at the end of his two year term as Governor
of Mississippi. He warned in his final speech that Republicans and Abolitionists
were  indistinguishable and that the election of Lincoln would mean war.  The
year before, in Florida, Governor Madison Perry (’32) was just taking  office.
He stated in his inaugural address that the state should not get sidetracked on
the issue of the slave trade, although he thought it  justifiable, but rather
prepare for war if Lincoln were elected.   Governor McWillie (’17) of
Mississippi and Governor Perry (’32) of  Florida wrote conceptually and
rhetorically similar speeches in 1859,  but there is no evidence that they wrote
their speeches in consultation; rather their common political categories and
habits of thought  converged toward similar conclusions.

The efforts of other alumni amplified this message. Alumni in Florida had been
agitating for  proslavery secessionist action at least since 1851 when John C.
McGeehee (‘21), eventually the president of Florida’s secession convention,
published a fire-eating Speech to the Southern Rights Association.   One
historian has noted that on the eve of the Civil War “The tone of the  Florida
Democratic press closely resembled that of Governor Perry’s  address, and the
newspapers often quoted with approval articles from the Charleston Mercury.”
Governor Perry’s (’32) journalistic friends  amplified his secessionist argument
while Perry corresponded with South  Carolina Governor Pickens (‘27).

Politicians like McWillie (‘17)  and Perry (‘32) used the press effectively to
promote their separatist  views, and they had a particular advantage, given that
alumni edited  extremist newspapers all over the lower South. Frequently the
name of  the newspaper gave away the radical political views of the alumnus at
the editors desk, as was the case in Mississippi with The True Southron, edited
by William Green Kennedy (‘47). Any paper with “states rights”  in the title,
such as the Jackson States Rights Banner or the Tuscaloosa States Rights
Expositor would likely be smudged with the fingerprints  of alumni. The former
was edited by Charles Colcock Mayson (‘12), the  latter by Richard T. Brumby
(‘24), who later became a professor at South Carolina College. The Augusta
States Rights Sentinel was edited by  Augustus Longstreet, a strident
secessionist who as the last antebellum  president of the College was still
producing propaganda at the time of  secession.  From the Savannah Republican to
the Galveston News, alumni  editors swapped and reprinted content from one
another’s publications  while keeping each other informed of local political
conditions. All of  these papers contributed to and benefited from the regular
harvest of  proslavery secessionist propaganda exported from South Carolina, the
seeds of which had been planted in the College.

Fire eating  alumni eagerly sought organize the support of other alumni in
creating  journalistic vehicles on the local, state and regional levels, but
they  were particularly keen to create a proslavery sectionalist paper in
Washington, where it would have maximum influence.   In 1847, a circular for
such a newspaper, written by I.W. Hayne (’27), was mailed to a  select group of
gentlemen throughout the South, soliciting funds before  the paper even opened.
Hayne (‘27), a secessionist who had been the  clerk of the nullification
convention before migrating to Alabama, was  conducting the nineteenth century
analog of a direct mail campaign. The  alumni of the college, scattered from
South Carolina across the Gulf  states, were well represented on his mailing
list, and he asked them to  solicit the help of other gentlemen in their
localities, in an attempt  to join grassroots agitation with national political
action. A group of  well known political South Carolinian political leaders,
signed the  circular, which contained noteworthy Federalist resonances:

	The object of this communication is to obtain your aid, and active
	cooperation, in establishing in Washington, a paper which shall
	represent Southern views on the subject of slavery--Southern views of
	Southern Rights and Interests, growing out of, and connected with this
	institution.... To effect this, we must render the press free from party
	influences, and unite in its support others besides politicians. We
	would therefore desire to engage in this undertaking men in every way
	INDEPENDENT; and whose means and positions are such as to free them from
	all temptations of profit or place.

The Federalist ideal of the  independent gentleman/politician whose wealth
elevated him above the  sordid scramble for partisan advantage was kept alive in
South Carolina, particularly among College alumni, long after it had disappeared
elsewhere. The independent gentlemen who signed this letter included R.  W.
Barnwell, the former president of the College, and another dozen  alumni.  It is
ironic but apt that the members of the Collegiate elite  thought of themselves
the spiritual antipodes of the abolitionists, men  of principle who eschewed
popularity, position, and lucre.  The alumni  who signed this circular wished to
control the balance of power by a  strict adherence to proslavery principle:

We make an appeal to  you, irrespective of party politics, as one having a
common interest  with ourselves, upon a matter as we conceive of momentous
concern to  every Southern man.... How have the Abolitionists, so inconsiderable
in  numbers, and themselves without official station, effected so much? The
answer is obvious. They have adhered to principle. They have made it  paramount
to party organization, and temporary policy, and they have  held the balance of
power between the two great parties. They have on  this account been courted,
together by Whig and Democrat, until it has  come about that no politician on
either side is considered as  "available," who cannot enlist on his behalf the
necessary vote; and  they are actually at this moment controlling the destinies
of this great Confederacy. Shall we not profit by their example? ... with ALL,
except the Abolitionists themselves, party success with its triumph and its
spoils, is the absorbing, if not the sole consideration.

On receiving the circular, James Henry Hammond (‘25) caustically emphasized the

practical utility of collegiate connections when he noted that that Hayne was,

…[M]y schoolfellow, companion, and friend from early boyhood until his  removal
to Alabama in 1835-6. From that period I have not seen or heard  from him save
when he had some favor to ask…. [H]e has lived ten years  in the west and has
learned that the only advantage of acquaintances is  to use them, and that it is
false delicacy and folly to fail to do it or at least attempt it whenever it is
desirable.

Hayne (‘27) had  lost patience waiting for Southern planters to spontaneously
create a  national proslavery journal in the nations capital. As he saw it, time
was running short in 1847 and action could not be postponed. In a letter to
Hammond (‘25), Hayne (‘27) acknowledged that his decision to act  left the
project open to the damaging charge of “South Carolina  dictation”. Hayne
acknowledged that resentment of South Carolina  hampered the acceptance in other
states of their radical political  initiatives, yet the necessity of mobilizing
the lower South had forced  his hand.“…[H]aving waited in vain for a movement
from some other  quarter we are determined to press the enterprise even under SC
origin.  The circular, with the subscription list has been widely circulated in
the South and in Louisiana and Alabama particularly.”

​	Some  alumni who received the mailing, like Hayne’s classmate, D.F.
Jamison  (‘27), who eventually served as the president of the South Carolina
secession convention, worried about the potential charge of “South  Carolina
dictation”. He  had misgivings about Hayne’s project but  decided that prudence
and patriotism demanded that they be expressed sub rosa. He wrote to Hammond
(‘25):

I have doubts about the wisdom  of the measure and I regret that it was ever
started, I am not willing  however to take responsibility of throwing cold water
on a matter which I trust has a good design, and is the first measure which has
yet been  adopted toward the union of the slaveholding states on that vital
question. It may be better to risk possible evil than to remain forever  supine.

The newspaper Hayne (’27) hoped to establish in  Washington was evanescent,
however, agitation of sectional issues  continued.  Radical editors continued to
print and reprint fire eating  editorials and letters. South Carolina’s Senator
Robert Barnwell, (who  had formerly been the President of the College) was so
opposed to  sectional compromise that he sent thousands of secession pamphlets
to  the Lower South in 1850.

These attempts to stimulate and  organize political opinion in the lower South
from the top down met with only limited success. More successful in practice was
grass roots  agitation by otherwise politically inconspicuous alumni who
persuaded  neighbors and friends that the seemingly extravagant doctrines held
by  South Carolina realistically reflected tangible Northern threats. The  case
of Dr. James W. Pierce (’29), of Line Creek, Alabama, might serve  as an example
of the influence exerted by the hundreds of relatively  inconspicuous alumni who
became local squires in small Gulf state  communities.

Dr. Pierce, (’29) a “cotton Whig” in an unremarkable district, had become
convinced during the controversy over the Wilmot  Proviso that the South was
imperiled by Northern aggression.  He  concluded that the Alabama Whiggery was
lukewarm on sectional questions, and on his own initiative he began to express
his concerns to his  neighbors and patients. Since he was an educated man and a
locally  notable citizen without personal political ambitions, his judgement in
such national political matters seems to have been taken seriously. He
organized a handful of the Whigs in his locality to pressure the local  party
newspaper and the local party apparatus to adopt a more  vociferously sectional
stance. He persuaded a dozen local notables  to  write a letter to the party’s
paper, the Alabama Journal, criticizing  its lack of emphasis on the looming
Northern threat and canceling their  subscriptions.

Within a month the local squires organized by Dr.  Pierce and his associates
convened a massive southern rights meeting  which articulated the grievances of
the South to the fifteen hundred  people who attended. Dr. Pierce introduced a
series of fire-eating  resolutions, which were enthusiastically endorsed by a
crowd of men who  only a few weeks earlier hardly knew that they were being
oppressed by  the North, much less that they were in immediate danger of losing
all.   Dr. Pierce’s agitation was a microcosmic example of the implosion of the
Southern Whig party in the wake of the Compromise of 1850. By the next
presidential election in 1852, no Line Creek Whig would support the  national
candidate, and Line Creek became a hotbed of sectionalist  extremism until the
eruption of the Civil War.  The breakup of the  second political party system in
the 1850s coincided with an upswell in  popular support for the extreme opinions
held by previously marginalized alumni.

Throughout the lower South, alumni of the College  established themselves as
local notables whose character and opinions  garnered the respect of other
members of their adopted communities. As  mayors, local judges or simply
respected private citizens, like Dr.  Pierce (’29), the alumni were persuasive
at the grass roots level.  Alumni who were inconspicuous local squires bridged
the gap between beat level political practice and national level political
theorizing. The  alumni leaned toward proslavery sectionalism, and over time
they  gravitated toward secession as a necessary means of protecting slavery
and the South. As an educated local elite in an area that had few  educated men,
their opinions were given a respectful hearing, and their  rhetorical abilities
allowed them to appeal to men who could not afford  or could perhaps not read
radical newspapers. Mass meetings like the one organized by Dr. Pierce (‘29) and
his associates took place in other  Gulf States as well.

The conspiratorial activities of the alumni in the Gulf  were only in an
attenuated and indirect sense part of the  grand conspiracy anticipated by Dr.
Pierce’s teacher,  Thomas Cooper.   With a few exceptions among Cooper’s
cronies, agitation was more usually the more or less spontaneous result of a
self conscious intellectual  elite shouldering its self imposed political
responsibilities. Dr.  Pierce (’29) and many more alumni like him rendered the
radical  doctrines espoused in far off South Carolina plausible to men in their
locality who would later make up the rank and file of the Confederate  army.
Throughout the lower South, alumni accepted the burden which they  believed came
with their superior knowledge and abilities. Whatever  their locality or
profession or institutional affiliations, South  Carolina College alumni in the
lower South shared similar political  assumptions and moved toward common
political ends.

Former  president of the college R. W. Barnwell was conscious of the leadership
which the College and the Palmetto state provided to the South as a  whole. He
wrote that "South Carolina and her offshoots have hitherto  given dignity to the
position of the South. The greater part of the  slaveholders in the other states
are mere negro-drivers believing  themselves wrong and only holding onto their
negroes as something to  make money out of."  The alumni were not mere political
agitators, they  believed that they were on a civilizing mission to create a
South in the image of South Carolina. Alumni sometimes offered politicians from
lesser southern states the opportunity to become honorary South  Carolinians if
they were sufficiently radical. In a debate on the floor  of Congress, Waddy
Thompson, (‘14) said “He had listened in vain for one South Carolina argument,
or one honest bursting out of the feelings of a South Carolinian; not of a South
Carolinian of geography only, but one  who has the head to see the dangers that
await us and a heart that does  not shrink from meeting them.”

At their most grandiose, they  envisioned the South as South Carolina writ
large. Just as their  forefathers had harmonized the upcountry and lowcountry
within South  Carolina, alumni hoped to do something analogous for the entire
lower  South. The southern identity the alumni helped create was the self
idealization South Carolina’s master class writ large. In their  political
agitation, proslavery theory merged with secessionist practice to form a
Southern identity. The creation of this identity was accepted as a burden
entailed by their higher education and what the alumni  regarded as their
superior powers of moral discernment. Their South was  slavery and honor,
property and justice, legality and morality. The  alumni often implied and
sometimes directly stated that they spoke for  the South, that they embodied the
zeitgeist of Southern nationality. In  political life the alumni often
represented themselves as the advocates  of far more than their particular
district or state, they represented  the South, the backcountry of a greater
South Carolina. During the  wrangling over the Compromise of 1850, Congressman
William McWillie of  Mississippi (’17) took it upon himself to speak for whole
section when  he stated that “We, of the South, are known as ultraists…”.
Congressman Lawrence Keitt (‘43) spoke for his Southern nation, this more than
geographical greater South Carolina referred to by Congressman Thompson  (’14),
when he declaimed “Two civilizations are confronting each other  and any panacea
is quackery.  These gentlemen claimed to speak for the  civilization of the
South because they conceived of themselves  collectively as the South
personified. As Congressman Keitt (’43) stated on the House floor: …I shall
speak only as a Southern man. The North  and South, with different social and
industrial systems, and with  diversities of temper, sentiment, and material
interests, are revolving  upon the same Federal axis, and developing their own
peculiar types of  prosperity and civilization.  They were among the first
Americans to  pursue “identity politics”.

The alumni wanted as extensive a  nation as possible, and they were concerned to
push the geographical  boundaries of their gestating nation. Several dozen saw
action during  the Mexican War and got their first military experience there.
Others  went to Kansas in the mid 1850s in an attempt to bring it in as a slave
state.  Summerfield Massilon Glen Gary (‘47) had the distinction of  being a
member the Secession Conventions in two states, California and  Florida. When
California failed to secede, he returned to the South and  joined the
Confederate army as a Colonel. The South was a work in  progress and the
boundaries were not fixed until war erupted. Prior to  that, the alumni had at
various times coveted Juarez, Kansas, Cuba and  California as Southern
territory. The attraction of expanding slave  territory diminished as the
antebellum period waned, however, because  such adventure were a distraction
from the main objective: secession.

The alumni acted as the virtual representatives of the gestating Southern
nation, and held proslavery Southern separatist sentiments, but  nonetheless,
they simultaneously treated South Carolina as the most  Southern state, sui
generis, which in fact it was. This assertion of  “Ur” Southern status for South
Carolina could be taken to excessive  lengths. In 1838 two Congressmen, Graves
of Kentucky and Cilley of Maine fought a duel with rifles that Cilley urgently
and ineffectively wanted to avoid. After three exchanges of fire Graves killed
him. This was the kind of handsome, spirited action the alumni could appreciate;
yet they also expressed a certain ambivalence toward the uncouth Kentuckian and
the lack of matched dueling pistols. The decision to expel Graves from  Congress
for defending his honor was thought improper by sympathetic  alumni. As James
Henry Hammond (‘25) put it succinctly, “Poor Graves, I  pity him. He is a good
fellow- not So Ca good, but good….”

“So Ca good” is what the college produced. Such hauteur often got the alumni
into trouble with other Southerners. Despite the fact that the empirical South
resisted, fire-eating alumni continued to claim that they spoke  for the South,
and so they did, because their South was not a place but  the idea of their own
unique collective perfectibility. Quixotically,  the alumni sometimes mistook an
ideal South Carolina they imagined for  the real South they encountered.
Similarly they sometimes mistook the  real Southerners they encountered as being
what R.W. Barnwell had  condescendingly described as “mere Negro drivers”, and
worse.  During  the heated partisan wrangling of Nullification, Congressman
McDuffie  (‘13) treated Congressman Bates of Missouri as inferior and Bates
challenged him in 1829.  The dispute was settled without shots, but  McDuffie,
who was infamous for a series of duels in the early 1820s, was only one in a
long line of alumni in politics who offended the  sensibilities of other white
Southerners. Many alumni who entered  politics provoked resentment in other
Southerners because they  personified the hauteur of “South Carolina dictation”.
The most astute  of the alumni tried to avoid the appearance of South Carolinian
interference in the internal politics of other slave states, but in the  opinion
of many Southerners, secession was a hysterical product of the  “gentleman’s
politics” peculiar to South Carolina. James Henry Hammond  (’25) and his ilk
knew that the charge of South Carolinian dictation  could stymie the movement
toward secession and he worried about such a  charge in the vote for the
Nashville convention of 1850. He consequently wrote to one concerned southerner
“…it would be impolitic for any SC to influence directly the proceedings of your
convention.”

The  alumni, in and out of the state, were “So Ca good” and this entailed a
peculiar reverence for South Carolina. The resulting condescension of  alumni
toward other potential Confederate states and their  representatives alienated
many. Maxcy Gregg (‘35) voiced the sentiments  of many when he wrote to James
Henry Hammond (’25), “A consolidation  with Georgia and Tennessee I regard as
not quite so great an evil as a  consolidation with New York and Ohio…”.  Alumni
were disappointed by the fact that many Southerners resisted their messianic
mission. As James  Henry Hammond (’25) wrote

…I am perfectly convinced that any  measure of any character offered by SC to
her sister states will  certainly be rejected. A southern convention has long
been a favorite  project with me. I look upon it as the only hope of safety for
us and  that every day it is delayed diminishes our chances. I have twenty times
thought I would urge it in a series of essays but have always  [illegible] by
the belief that nothing short of a miracle would convince any other Southern
state that any good could come out of Nazareth…”

Southern nationalist propaganda was quietly and indefatigably churned out
despite the need to avoid the appearance of South Carolina dictation.  Senator
and former president of the College, R.W. Barnwell wrote to  Hammond (‘25)

Write a strong article for the Georgia press. … By  the way you must prepare an
address for the next Nashville Convention  and send it to someone in Mississippi
to be presented. I am in earnest,  from the specimens which I saw at our last
meeting I am convinced that  nothing worth putting out can [be] prepared out of
SC…SC must not appear in the matter…I still think your plan a good one and we
shall be a  fireship in the Union.

The repeated appropriation of the  authentic voice of the South by the alumni of
the College was highly  controversial. Other Southerners contested the claim
that the South  Carolinian elite spoke for the South. Resistance to South
Carolinian  condescension was particularly acute in Georgia which had long been
overshadowed by the Palmetto state. One historian noted, “Georgia’s  Union
Democrats were quick to attribute disunion sentiment to the  influence of South
Carolina natives who had migrated across the Savannah River.  Louisiana also
resisted South Carolinian influences because the state had a its own powerful
elite centered in New Orleans. The alumni  personified the atavistic political
culture of South Carolina, which,  whatever its attractions, had many
inconsistencies with the more popular and democratic political culture of the
lower South. Senator Henry  Foote of Mississippi objected to what was called by
many of his  constituents “South Carolina dictation” and disclaimed the
“aristocratic arrogance” of the Palmetto state.  In the wrangling over the
compromise of 1850, he pointedly responded to the intransigence of South
Carolina’s Senator Andrew Pickens Butler (‘17) by stating that “every  southern
state, except South Carolina”…supported the compromise.  Moreover he insisted
that opposition to the compromise was found only  “among a small minority of
southern men who seem to imagine themselves  the whole South”, pointedly
referring to Butler (’17) and his ilk.   During the same debate, Senator Sam
Houston of Texas charged, with only  slight exaggeration, that secessionist
political thought was strictly a  South Carolinian imposition on the South. He
declaimed “…I believe that  if South Carolina never had existed, and if it had
not been for her  disposition, and for the movement that began there,
Mississippi would  never have thought of it [secession].”

In much of the South,  South Carolina was the object of much popular animosity
on account of  its tradition of extremist politics. In 1851 Oscar Lieber (‘49)
wrote  from Alabama back to his mother in Columbia, South Carolina:

S.C. has, I am sorry to say, not many admirers here. The other day a  blacksmith
accosted me: Capt, I say, now you’se from sou Calina is you?  Well maybe you can
tell me, wot she’s a kicking up such a dust about.  Seems to me as long as I can
remember, an I ain’t young neither, she’s  been kicking up about some G---d----
thing or other. …Again we spent a  night at the house of a jolly horse trader
who with evident pride let us into [a few?] of his cheating secrets… well he
inquired where I was  from and when I named S.C. he replied: “I liked you a
great deal better  before you told me that.”

The visceral antipathy felt by many  Southerners toward the belligerent
dogmatism and delusions of  aristocracy symbolized by South Carolina made
electoral politics  difficult for alumni in many localities. In Louisiana,
Congressman  Landrum (’27) the only alumnus sent to Congress from that state,
was  from Shreveport. Of the few alumni who prospered in Louisiana, most
settled in northern Louisiana, as far as possible from the influence of
powerful, culturally distinct elite of New Orleans. In northern  Louisiana,
alumni more often succeeded in becoming locally notable  mayors and judges.

Since Texas and Florida came into the Union in 1845, both states were initially
quite reluctant to secede from a Union they had just joined. Alumni in both
states were associated with the  movement toward cooperative secession. As in
the case of Congressman  Landrum (’27) of Louisiana, Texas elected only one
alumnus to Congress,  Senator Louis T. Wigfall (’37). Both were elected at the
height the  secession crisis. The Galveston News, one of the most important
papers  edited by alumni in antebellum Texas, gave secession hearty support  In
Florida, the alumni were more influential than in Texas because they  were more
numerous there. Florida was closer than Texas and alumni had  been settling
there, particularly in the panhandle, since the 1820s.  After the passage of the
Compromise of 1850, only six years after  entering the Union, John C. McGeehee
(‘21) of Florida, who later became  the president of the Florida secession
convention, organized a Southern  Rights Association which served as a focal
point for secessionist  activities.

In Georgia there was resistance to South Carolinian influence dating back to the
colonial period. However, a handful of  alumni were elected to the legislature
or became state judges. Governor  McDonald (’16) and several members of Congress
all served in the 1840s.  Newspapers in Savannah and Augusta often showed South
Carolinian  sympathies and were edited by alumni  One historian has argued that
in  1849 Mississippi took over from South Carolina leadership of southern
resistance.  In fact political leadership in Mississippi was  considerably
indebted to South Carolina. Much of the leadership given by Mississippi amounted
to proposing South Carolinian policies in order to help the Palmetto elite avoid
the “South Carolina dictation” wrangle. A number of Mississippi’s leading
secessionist politicians, like  Congressman and Governor William McWillie (‘17),
were alumni. Like  Alabama, Mississippi had enclaves of alumni in places like
Holly Springs and Jackson who held proslavery secessionist political
aspirations.  Like Alabama, radical enclaves of alumni in Mississippi often
supported a newspaper.  During the controversy over the Compromise of 1850,
Congressman McWillie (’17) wrote that if the South could not have its  demands
met the time to fight is now because temporizing just makes the  battle more
unequal.  He made much the same argument was made in 1860.

In Alabama, four hundred pound Senator Dixon Lewis (’20) was the most  prominent
of the alumni elected to high office. He had close personal  connections with
Congressmen Dellett (‘10), and Hilliard (’26),  Governors Gayle (’13) and Murphy
(’08). A number a alumni were elected  to the state legislature and served in
the state judiciary. The  transplanted alumni made the most of the resources at
their disposal. As one contemporary noted of Samuel F. Rice (’33), he had
“…large and  influential family connections. [was] …among the sharpest debaters
on  the floor and skilled in parrying and making thrusts. He published the
Talladega Watchtower.  The Watchtower was one of several extremist  newspapers
edited by alumni in Alabama.  The historian Thornton Mills  found five main
secessionist enclaves in antebellum Alabama.  Alumni  were active in all of
them. In some cases South Carolinian political  issues influenced the electoral
fortunes of alumni in other states and  vice versa. When Dixon Lewis (‘20) won a
Congressional race against John Murphy (’08) in Alabama, the editor of the
Charleston Mercury  interpreted it as “a victory for nullification”.  The
Mercury also had  scathing criticism of Gov. Gayle (’13) of Alabama for his
opposition to  Nullification.

Although Gayle (’13) had practical reasons for not supporting Nullification,
(the risk of Civil War made it impossible to  sell Alabama’s bonds in New York),
he was ardently proslavery.  Nullification was harmful to Alabama as a political
means, but the end  of sustaining slavery he never contested. In a 1835 case,
one Robin G.  Williams of New York sent abolitionist literature to Alabama,
Gayle  (’13) wrote to Governor Marcy of New York to extradite Williams for
trial in Alabama. “For distributing a seditious paper [in Alabama]  maliciously
designing and intending to incite the slave population  thereof to insurrection
and rebellion against their masters.”  Governor  Marcy of course refused, but
Governor Gayle thought the request worth  making. Earlier that same year, the
same bizarre proposal, that Northern abolitionists should be extradited, tried
and executed in Southern  states, had been made by Congressman James Henry
Hammond (’25).

South Carolina exported its thought through the medium of the printed word  and
its thinkers in the form of South Carolina College alumni. Radicals  connected
with the College between 1820 and 1860 tried to make common  cause with a
largely quiescent group of heterogeneous Southern states.   In 1820s and 1830s
Nullifiers, many of whom were connected with the  College, sought support for
Nullification and were repudiated by most of the South.  Much the same cast of
characters was involved in the Gag  Rule Controversy of the 1830s.  South
Carolina was largely isolated  again.   Disappointed by the response from the
Chesapeake and border  states, South Carolinians sought help from Georgia,
Alabama,  Mississippi, Louisiana, and were again rejected. Lewis (’20) and
Hammond (’25) and Pickens (’27) were isolated ultras in Congress. They received
little support in Louisiana or Mississippi, and only marginal support  in
Alabama and Georgia. In 1840s proslavery separatists in South  Carolina, (for
example in the Bluffton movement), many of whom were  alumni, thought their best
hope lay in help from Georgia, Alabama,  Mississippi, Louisiana; after 1845 they
also looked to Florida and  Texas. In the 1840s they got little support in Texas
or Louisiana, some  support in Florida, and sporadic support in Georgia,
Alabama,  Mississippi. In 1850s South Carolinian Cooperationists, who were the
more realistic of the secessionists, sought help in the Nashville  convention,
which was largely the brainchild of alumni. Alumni  represented Georgia,
Alabama, Mississippi and Louisiana at the  convention. By the mid 1850s
secession had substantial patches of  support in the lower South from Georgia to
Texas. These tinderboxes of  Southern nationalism were often lit by fire-eating
alumni. The support  for secession waxed hotter and the embers of Southern
nationalism fanned by alumni burst into flame at the election of Abraham
Lincoln.

In the Secession Convention of December, 1860, the elder statesmen of  South
Carolina proclaimed the reasons for their decision in a  “Declaration of the
Immediate Causes of Secession”. Of the seven men  delegated to draft this
document, one, Robert W. Barnwell was a former  president of the College, three
of the other six, C.G. Memminger (‘19),  F.H. Wardlaw (‘18) and J.P. Richardson
(‘19) were men who had met more  than forty years earlier at South Carolina
College. The views in this  document were endorsed by the Commissioner that had
been sent to South  Carolina’s Convention by the state of Alabama, John A.
Elmore (’24). He  had encouraged Cooperationists by informing the Convention on
the first  day of its meeting that secession would “ give the cause strength not
only in Alabama, but with other states united with her in sentiment.”   After
seceding, the Convention prudently attempted to cement political  ties with
other states. On December 24, one member of the Convention,  William S. Lyles
(’32), made a motion to extend an invitation to sit at  the Convention to
Madison S. Perry (’32), Governor of Florida.  Lyles  and Perry had been friends
at College during the early 1830s, at the  height of Cooper's influence. The
next day Perry cabled back to the  Convention that he regretted not being able
to attend immediately,  though

I approve of every act of your Convention, in so far as it  is known to me, in
every particular. Your Ordnance is in good taste, to  the point, and covers the
whole ground. Permit me to assure you that  gallant little Florida will be the
next to follow your patriotic lead.  Upon the meeting of the Convention, Florida
will, as certainly as  anything in the future can be certain, wheel immediately
into line  behind the gallant old Palmetto. We are identified with you in
interest, in feeling, in determination not to submit to Black republican rule,
and a common destiny must be ours.

At the Secession Convention,  some men like Maxcy Gregg (‘35) wished to include
a list of peripheral  issues like the tariff of Abominations and the Bank in the
Declaration,  but fire-eater Lawrence Keitt (‘43) argued forcefully for clarity,
insisting that such trivial diversions diminished their cause. He  insisted that
the focus be kept on slavery, which was, as he put it,  “the great central point
from which we are proceeding.”  The Convention  voted with Keitt. The document
produced by the Convention was perfectly  candid about their reason for
seceding. State sovereignty is mentioned,  but only with reference to slavery,

We affirm that these ends for which this government was instituted have been
defeated, and the  Government itself has been destructive of them by the action
of the  nonslaveholding States. Those States have assumed the right of deciding
upon the propriety of our domestic institutions; and they have denied  the
rights of property established in fifteen of the States and  recognized by the
Constitution; they have denounced as sinful the  institution of slavery; they
have permitted the open establishment among them of societies, whose avowed
object is to disturb the peace and  eloign the property of the citizens of other
States. They have  encouraged and assisted thousands of our slaves to leave
their homes;  and those who remain, have been incited by emissaries, books and
pictures to servile insurrection.

The Declaration frankly acknowledged that the election of Abraham Lincoln
prompted

them to secede because it signaled the triumph of abolitionism. Their
Constitution

would not be safe in his hands:

For twenty five years this agitation has been steadily increasing, until it has
now secured to its aid the power of the common Government.  Observing the forms
of the Constitution, a sectional party has found in  the Article establishing
the Executive Department, the means of  subverting the Constitution itself. A
geographical line has been drawn  across the Union, and all the States north of
that line have united in  the election of a man to the high office of President
of the United  States, whose opinions and purposes are hostile to slavery. He is
to be  entrusted with the administration of the common Government, because he
has declared that that “Government cannot endure permanently half slave, half
free,” and that the public mind must rest in the belief that  slavery is in the
course of ultimate extinction.

According to the Declaration, extending citizenship to black people only

exacerbated the lawless sectional partisanship and antislavery fanaticism which
had

dishonored the North for a generation. The Declaration continued:

This sectional combination for the submersion of the Constitution, has been
aided in some of the states by elevating to citizenship, persons, who,  by the
supreme law of the land, are incapable of becoming citizens; and  their votes
have been used to inaugurate a new policy, hostile to the  South, and
destructive of its beliefs and safety.

On the 4th of  March next, this party will take possession of the Government. It
has  announced that the South shall be excluded from the Common territory,  that
the judicial tribunals shall be made sectional, and that a war must be waged
against slavery until it shall cease throughout the United  States.

The guarantees of the Constitution will then no longer  exist; the equal rights
of the States will be lost. The slaveholding  States will no longer have the
power of self-government, or  self-protection, and the Federal government will
have become the enemy.

Sectional interest and animosity will deepen the irritation, and all hope of
remedy rendered vain, by the fact that public opinion at the North has  invested
a great political error with the sanctions of more erroneous  religious belief.

​	This document, which the new Commissioners of the new Republic of South
Carolina took with them when they invited  other Southern states to join them to
form the Confederacy, contained  familiar ideas which alumni of South Carolina
College had been  advocating since Nullification. The individuals who were
appointed as  Commissioners from South Carolina and proclaimed its independence
were  equally familiar. The convention had to choose its best and most capable
men for such a momentous task, and the choice fell largely upon alumni. On New
Year's day, Leonidas W. Spratt (’40) was elected Commissioner to Florida. On
January 2, 1861, A. P. Calhoun (’32) was elected  Commissioner to Alabama, John
L. Manning (’37) was elected Commissioner  to Louisiana, A. C. Spain (’41) was
elected Commissioner to Arkansas,  and former Congressman M. L. Bonham (’34) was
elected Commissioner to  Mississippi, but illness struck and he was replaced.
C. G. Memminger  (’19) was eventually appointed Commissioner to Virginia.

Each of  these appointments was apt because these Commissioners had previously
established connections in the states that received them which enhanced  their
credibility. John L. Manning (’37) was sent to Louisiana, where he was well
known as a planter with large land and slaveholdings. Indeed,  South Carolina’s
Commissioners doubtless got a warm reception from the  transplanted alumni who
graced the secession conventions in Virginia,  North Carolina, Arkansas,
Florida, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi,  Louisiana, and Texas.

​	On January 9, 1861, Mississippi was the  second state to secede. The
Mississippi Secession Convention had five  alumni among its members. Henry
Vaughan, Sr. (‘16) described himself as  an "Old Line Whig Secessionist." Hugh
R. Miller (’33) was on campus  during Cooper's agitation over Nullification and
he described himself as a "States Rights Democrat." Andrew Pickens Hill (’41)
came from a  family of Nullifying South Carolinian gentry who moved to
Mississippi  during the "flush times." T. C. Bookter (’52) and J. R. Chalmers
(’51)  participated in the death and burial of chemistry. Bookter described
himself as a "Secession Democrat," Chalmers was a "States Rights  Democrat." The
Governor during the previous term, William McWillie,  (’17) was an alumnus, and
many alumni were in other state offices. The  Commissioner from South Carolina,
Armistead Burt, was regaled at the  Mississippi Convention by secessionist
politicians, including a number  of expatriate South Carolinians. The Secession
Convention listened to  Burt explain the implications of secession the way "We
understand them  in South Carolina."  J. R. Chalmers, who had been the
valedictorian of  the class of 1851, spoke in favor of secession.  In 1864, Col.
Chalmers  achieved notoriety as one of the commanders in the massacre at Fort
Pillow, Tennessee, the occurrence of which he modestly denied.

​	 Leonidas Spratt was welcomed warmly by the Florida Secession
Convention.  Governor Perry (‘32), was an enthusiastic secessionist, as was the
President of the Convention, John C. McGeehee, (’21). McGeehee and the  other
four alumni at the Convention voted for secession.  The third  state to leave
the Union, Florida, seceded January 10, 1861. Andrew  Pickens Calhoun (’32) was
well received by the Alabama Secession  Convention. He had been a planter in
Marengo County for twenty years,  had family ties to influential "Southern
rights" politicians in the  state, and since he was the late Senator's son, he
was known to be a  Calhounite.  Important state officials, like the President of
the  Alabama Senate, were alumni. In addition, five members of the Convention
matriculated at the College during the 1830s and 40s. Alabama seceded  on
January 11, 1861.

​	Georgia seceded January 19th. Louisiana  seceded January 26th. Texas
seceded February 1st. South Carolina College alumni were among the members of
all these Conventions. In later  months, alumni were also members of the
Arkansas and Virginia and North  Carolina Secession Conventions.  The threat of
secession and civil war  over slavery, made by South Carolina's politicians in
the late  eighteenth century, was redeemed in 1860 largely by an elite group of
gentleman politicians who realized the doctrines that they were taught  in South
Carolina College. For a small group of men, the alumni of South Carolina College
were astonishingly ubiquitous in the creation of the  Confederacy. The most
dramatic index of the connection between South  Carolina College and the
development of Southern sectionalism is the  activities of the graduates in the
Civil War. The College contributed  many officers, including at least
twenty-three generals. Sixteen College alumni were members of the short-lived
Confederate Congress: they  represented Georgia, Florida, Louisiana,
Mississippi, Texas, and of  course, South Carolina.

​	The alumni had helped construct the collective identity of the
antebellum South

and eventually the Confederacy. As one alumnus remarked, “The ideas instilled,
the

doctrines inculcated, the influence exerted by the College, were disseminated
throughout

the whole  southern and southwestern country, not only by the students from
these other s

states, but by the great numbers of native South Carolinian students, who,
after graduation, emigrated there.”  The political doctrines elaborated  in the
College influenced more than the just the alumni. On November  third, 1863, the
President of the Confederate States addressed an  apprehensive Charleston
audience. One member of the audience remembered  how  Jefferson Davis described
the South Carolinian influence upon his  political views. Davis had said
“…[T]ruly … here had begun the  Revolution. Before he had commenced political
life he had imbibed the  doctrines of states rights as expounded through the
Southern Quarterly  Review by the learned Dr. Cooper of our state.”  	Within
the Palmetto  State, the College was recognized as the locus of secessionist
political thinking, but it is equally important to acknowledge the influence of
South Carolina College on the development of a common identity  throughout the
lower South which was the precondition for practically  viable secession. The
College produced ministers, doctors, editors and  planters who turned out to be
indefatigable writers and talkers. Papers  like the Charleston Mercury and
periodicals like the Southern Quarterly  Review allowed those alumni who
dominated politics in South Carolina to  reach a wide audience throughout the
embryonic Southern Nation, a nation conceived largely in their imaginations. As
one alumnus, who had served in the Confederate army remembered:

To the College is very  largely attributable the influence which has not only
made South  Carolina the prompt and determined champion of Southern rights and
interests, especially state sovereignty, free trade, and the institution of
domestic African slavery, but which has also deeply impressed the  doctrines
entertained, by South Carolina, on those subjects on the heart and mind of the
entire South and Southwest. So great has been this  influence as to give it
historical significance.
