---
src: https://michaelsugrue.substack.com/p/a-book-i-never-published-e28
---

Chapter Six:

The Defense of Slavery and the Duel for a Nation

“They are all honorable men”

-Shakespeare, Julius Caesar

Despite the oppressive heat of August, 1828, Congressman Waddy Thompson

(’14) of Greenville, South Carolina gave a stump speech which was halfway
between a formal political oration and a sermon, in which he offered to  lead
his constituents in a march on Washington to demand their rights.  One
contemporary wrote that the

Citizens of the district held an  antitariff meeting near the Baptist meeting
house… Mr. Thompson  addressed the meeting for 1 hour and 20 minutes, telling
the people that the wise-akers of the nation, called them the Rable (sic), you
my  constituents are called the rabble by the great men of the North and  East
and West and are not fit or even capable of judging for yourselves  as to the
Tariff, so they have imposed one of their own liking on you  and you are now
slaves, he called on them to rise in their power and  assert their rights and he
would march at their head. After his  political fire and brimstone was exhausted
a few resolutions were  offered and passed with one voice AY!!! …Mr. Thompson
acquitted himself  well, it was a good stump speech…

​	Alumni of the College who  participated in national politics, like
Congressman Thompson (’14), were a self-conscious political vanguard who sought
to establish the terms  of public discourse and to instruct an often laggard
public.  The stump  speech was the preferred vehicle for disseminating political
ideas, and  the alumni tried to disseminate them from the top down if possible.
Alumni attempted with varying degrees of success to mold public opinion  rather
than just passively respond to it. The men associated with the  College as
alumni, faculty and trustees regarded themselves as teachers  of society in an
extended sense. As one contemporary South Carolinian  noted, “A graduate of this
college is a teacher among the people. His  diploma is his commission, and by
virtue of it he will be obeyed.”  This view was endorsed by fire-eating
Congressman L.M. Keitt (’43) who wrote from Washington, “I assume that my
position is as much to teach at  least as to be taught.”

​	Between 1820 and 1835, radical alumni of the College sought to teach an
extreme variant of proslavery  sectionalism to the nation as a whole, to the
South as a potential  nation, and to the white residents of South Carolina
itself,  particularly to the class of nonslaveholding yeoman farmers who were
excluded from attending the College. The peculiar and largely  self-constructed
theories of the alumni bolstered and directed their  actions in national
politics. Simultaneously, the idiosyncratic  practices of the alumni in Congress
reciprocally influenced their  political theorizing and that of the state as a
whole. Their proslavery  dogmas mutated into disparate but still radical
“positive good”  arguments in the 1830s, though some had been proposed as early
as the  1820s. The secessionist implications which underlay the Nullifiers
punctilious legalism and constitutionalism were also elaborated by  alumni in
the late 1820s and 1830s. They developed these implications  into a proslavery
sectional extremism which was refined over the next  thirty years in the
episodes of America’s chronic sectional conflict:  the Gag Rule, the opposition
to the Compromise of 1850, the Nashville  Convention, the movement to reopen the
slave trade, and of course,  secession itself.  Collectively, the alumni formed
the ideological elite of what Northerners called “the Slave Power”.

​	In speech and in  print alumni of the college captured national
attention as the most  notorious of Southern “Ultras”. Between 1835 and 1860
alumni and faculty of the College were prominent and disruptive advocates of
proslavery  Southern nationalism in Washington. They popularized their extreme
doctrines as best they could, gradually and then with increasing vigor  fanning
the flames of support during the 1850s. In 1876, after  Reconstruction ended
within South Carolina the alumni returned to power  and remained there until
1890. Alumni formed the leadership of the  “Bourbons” who transformed proslavery
into white supremacy and Southern  nationalism into “Home Rule”. They prevailed
until Ben Tillman and his  yeoman followers ousted the old guard and realized
some of the least  attractive potentials of Jeffersonian democracy, which the
alumni of the College had impeded since the time of Jefferson himself.

​	Prior to 1820, during the “Era of Good Feelings”, only five of the
earliest  alumni represented South Carolina in Congress and they were far more
moderate and nationalistic than their later and more numerous  counterparts.
During the controversy over the Missouri Compromise in  1820, Thomas Cooper had
just arrived on campus, Calhoun was still young  and nationalistic and
ambitious, and none of South Carolina’s  representatives in Congress were
alumni. R. R. Reid, (‘08) a Congressman from Georgia, who later became
territorial Governor of Florida, was the only alumnus serving in Congress in
1820. In a remarkable speech he  inveighed against the Taylor amendment (which
imposed restrictions on  slavery) to the Missouri Compromise. Reid called
slavery a state of  society that was unalterably “fixed”. He described slavery
as a  necessary evil which only a “miracle” could rectify. He also sketched  the
main contours of the militant proslavery secessionist argument,  which was a
legacy of the founding generation. According to Reid,  attempts by philanthropic
politicians to abolish slavery did more harm  than good. Racism, North and South
would undermine such a policy:

Are we called upon to emancipate our slaves? I answer, their welfare -- the
safety of our own citizens, forbid it. Can we incorporate them with us, and make
them and us one people? The prejudices of the North and of the South rise up in
equal strength against such a measure; and even those, who clamor most loudly
for the sublime doctrines of your Declaration of Independence, who shout in your
ears, "all men are by nature equal!"  would turn with abhorrence and disgust
from a party-colored progeny!  Shall we then be blamed for a state of things to
which we are obliged to submit?

Anticipating the views of later alumni in national  politics, Reid made
reference to the tradition of strict construction  and states rights, which was
jeopardized by a coercive, consolidating  nationalism.

Assure yourselves you have not the authority to bind a State coming into the
Union with a single hair! If you have, you may  rivet a chain upon every limb, a
fetter upon every joint. Where, then, I ask, is the independence of your State
governments? Do they not fall  prostrate, debased, covered with sackcloth and
crowned with ashes before the gigantic power of the Union?

In his summation, Reid echoed South Carolinian arguments of 1790 when he
threatened

Civil War over the issue of slavery in the territories:

​	But, let gentlemen beware! Assume the Mississippi as the boundary. Say,
that to the smiling Cannan beyond its waters, no slave shall approach,  and you
give a new character to its inhabitants, totally distinct from  that which shall
belong to the people thronging on the east of your  limits. You implant
diversity of pursuits, hostility of feeling, envy,  hatred, and bitter
reproaches, which,

​			"Shall grow to clubs and naked swords,

​			"To murder and to death."

If you remain inexorable, if you persist in refusing the humble, the  decent,
the reasonable prayer of Missouri, is there no danger that her  resistance will
rise in proportion to your oppression? Sir, the  firebrand which is even now
cast into your society, will require blood  -- ay, and the blood of freemen --
for its quenching. Your Union shall  tremble, as under the force of an
earthquake! While you incautiously  pull down a Constitutional barrier, you make
way for the dark, and  tumultuous, and overwhelming waters of desolation! If you
"sow the  winds, must you not reap the whirlwind?"

With some adjustments  and amplifications, proslavery arguments reinforced by
threats of  secession and Civil War, like that made by Congressman Reid in 1820,
were adopted by an increasing number of alumni during and after  nullification.
By 1860 support for slavery, secession, and if necessary, Civil War was close to
unanimous for the alumni as well as for the  students still in College. It is
instructive to make a dual comparison  between Reid’s speech in 1820 and first,
speeches by alumni in Congress  in 1860 and second, speeches by South Carolina’s
Senator Smith in 1790.  All threaten secession and Civil War in response to
abolitionism. The  continuity between the political thought of South Carolina’s
Federalist  politicians in 1790 and fire-eating alumni in 1860 is unmistakable.

​	Henry L. Pinckney (’12) was the son of Congressman Charles Pinckney. In
1820 the elder Pinckney made a speech in Congress on the Constitution  and
slavery which unequivocally endorsed the orthodox Carolinian reading of the
framers original intent.  Pinckney would know, because at the  time he was the
last living signer of the Constitution, and he knew the  meaning of the document
he not only signed but helped draft. Pinckney  (‘12) like his entire generation
of alumni learned his proslavery  constitutionalism from an honorable gentleman
of unquestioned veracity,  his father. The younger Pinckney (’12) was later
notorious for his  actions during the “Gag Rule” controversy in Congress. By
most accounts  he was a proslavery extremist, but in his home district of
Charleston he was thought by some to be “unsound” on the question of slavery.
Yet in his Fourth of July oration of 1833 he insisted that opposition to the
tariff prevented “abolition” from “becoming the order of the day”. His
opposition to protectionism and the consolidated power of the federal
government was intimately bound up with the defense of slavery:

As it has already exempted one class of our citizens from the operation of our
laws relating to the tariff, why may it not extend its kindness to  another
class of our population, and regulate that according to its  paternal
conceptions of democratic equality and justice. If it has the  right to
undermine our property with iniquitous taxation, why not to  take it directly
and without taxation. If it has the right to coerce  obedience to legislative
pillage, why not to abolish our domestic  institutions at a blow and compel
submission to this new application of  its power? Already the omens are
alarming.

Pinckney warned that  abolitionism would cause South Carolina to become the next
Santo  Domingo, and that the “Missouri question” of slavery in the territories
may be revived. He vehemently denied Daniel Webster’s claim that slavery was “a
great moral and political evil”. The oration ended with a  threat: “Let but an
American Grey propose or Congress enact, a  West-India Bill for the Southern
United States- and they will find- not  that the Southern States are colonies-
but that the Union is gone.”

​	This sort of rhetoric was nothing new for Pinckney (’14). During the
1820s, while his father testified as to the framers original intent in
Washington, the son edited the Charleston Mercury, and in the wake of  the
Denmark Vesey conspiracy he had amply earned his credentials as a  proslavery
sectionalist agitator. In 1823, a month after he became  editor, Pinckney wrote
a furious editorial about the activities of  abolitionists in New York, and
threatened secession in response.   Through the 1820s, perhaps stimulated as
much by Pinckney’s  editorializing and Cooper’s pamphleteering as they were by
abolition in  the British West Indies, alumni in Congress were stiffening their
resistance to the tariff. Congressman Andrew Govan (’13) in 1824  suggested in a
speech on the floor, that the tariff entailed  sectionalism and disunion.
Govan’s classmate, Congressman George  McDuffie (‘13) repeatedly urged in 1827
and 1828 that the tariff was a  threat to the Union; Congressman John Campbell
(‘19) insisted in 1830  that the tariff would lead to war; and the threat was
renewed the next  year by Congressman William Nuckolls (‘20).   In 1820 none of
South  Carolina’s Congressmen was an alumnus; by 1835 one of the two Senators
and eight of the nine Congressmen were alumni. As the alumni began to  dominate
the highest levels of political leadership after 1820,  relations with the
federal government steadily worsened.

In 1828,  Pinckney (’14) reported in the Mercury that northern papers suggested
that the problems surrounding Nullification originated in the College”   The
faculty and alumni were conspicuous in the agitation over the  tariff, as was
the case in the notorious mass meeting of July 1827.  Cooper had “calculated the
value of the Union” while at the same meeting the equally radical professor
Henry insisted that his proslavery  secessionist political views made him a
“Federalist of the Old School”,  which in South Carolina was a plausible claim.
The “Federalists” of the College wanted their original proslavery Constitution
or none at all,  for them nullification was a means to secure independence in or
out of  the Union, never an end in itself.

Thomas Cooper’s proslavery  views meshed well with his secessionist inclinations
and many alumni  with similar views were also described as “nullifiers”, but the
metaphysics of state interposition and the agitation over the tariff  were
always of secondary importance. The connection between the tariff,  slavery and
the federal government was a more pressing problem. The  tariff, sustained by
incendiary northerners, was more than just  legislative theft; it was a threat
to slavery and slaveholders. George  McDuffie (‘13) who as Governor would put
the state on a war footing in  the mid 1830s, made the connection explicitly on
the floor of Congress  in 1830, insisting that the “irresistible tendency of
this protecting  system” to be “the abolition of slavery”

The alumni were men of  honor who whose self-conceptions were inextricably bound
up with  slavery. Abolition threatened their authenticity and self esteem.  It
challenged who they were: they believed their essential selves lay their status
as masters and gentlemen. Their construction of a regional  identity was this
self-conception writ large. The magnitude of the  threat posed by an alien,
antislavery federal government made the  dangers of nullification less daunting
to the alumni than to the rest of the country, despite the fact that many of
them recognized that  secession and Civil War were probably entailed. Cooper’s
student James  Henry Hammond (’25), who entered political life as an editor
during the  nullification crisis recalled “…only a few of the older nullifiers
regarded it as anything other than a form of secession.”  Francis W.  Pickens
(’27), who was in 1860 the secession governor of South Carolina, understood the
practical implications of nullification. In a letter to  Hammond, Pickens wrote
in 1830 “I am glad that you approve my sentiments …if we do not secede
constitutionally and peaceably, then I am free to  confess that I am for any
extreme, even war up to the hilt”.

Outside of South Carolina, Nullification was often equated with secession. R.R.
Reid (’08), who was a Judge in Florida during the nullification crisis, noted in
his diary that “Dr. S. a Nullifier, openly advocates disunion. Yes, if the
nullifiers succeed we are to have two republics.” Andrew  Jackson was only the
most influential of the many contemporaries who  insisted that nullification was
secession with a coy veneer of  constitutional casuistry. He correctly stated
that nullification was  secessionist. “The tariff was only a pretext and a
Southern confederacy  the real object. The next pretext will be the negro
question.”

​	 Much of the confusion about nullification is bound up with the
terminology that was current in South Carolina, which often had an  Orwellian
tinge.  As Thucydides noted centuries ago, in a crisis, words  change their
ordinary meaning. The alumni believed that they were  preserving freedom by
perpetuating slavery.  In most English speaking  localities, the opposite of a
“Unionist” might be a “Disunionist”, but  not in South Carolina, where,
tellingly, the opposite of “Unionist” was  “Nullifier”. The opposite of a
“Nullifier” might perhaps be an  “Antinullifier” or “Consolidationist” or
“Tariffite” or “Protectionist”, but not in South Carolina, where the preferred
term was “Unionist”. The South Carolinian “Unionists” who opposed nullification
were not, as in  most of the United States, by definition opposed to disunion:
in fact  some of them were clear headed secessionists. H.W. Rice (’14) was a
“Unionist” who took the very reasonable position that the tariff was  oppressive
and that a constitutional right to nullification was  preposterous. In an 1832
letter to the Charleston Mercury, he frankly  proposed cooperative secession
instead.  At an 1832 mass meeting of the  “Union” men of Sumpter County, Richard
I. Manning (’11) and John P.  Richardson (’19) addressed the crowd and demanded
redress of the  grievances caused by the tariff. Failing that they demanded
secession  directly, without nullification, “peaceably if we can, forcibly if we
must.”  To be opposed to nullification made a man a “Unionist”, but not
necessarily the kind who intended to remain in the union. Even those  Unionists
who did consistently oppose secession, like Judge John Belton  O’Neall (‘12)
were publicly committed to  “South Carolina right or  wrong”.

Unionism in South Carolina was always conditional  unionism, and the conditions
demanded were sometimes reasonable but  often extravagant to the point of self
parody. Even a man who spent most of his career as a Southern nationalist, James
Henry Hammond (’25),  could be a conditional Unionist, if the conditions were
right. In an  1835 letter to a New York City editor, Congressman Hammond (’25),
(like  Alabama’s Governor Gayle (’13) the same year) proposed the soothe
sectional discord by reinforcing the fugitive slave laws with a fugitive
abolitionist law:

We do not believe that all or perhaps a  majority of the northern people favor
the views of the Incendiaries, but what does it boot us if they don’t, so long
as they give them an asylum from which to hurl their murderous missiles- They
can be silenced in  only one way- Terror – Death. The nonslaveholding states
must pass laws  denying protection to them and yielding them up on demand, to
those  whose laws and rights they have violated and whose lives they have
endangered and in some instances destroyed. This is the only remedy.  This alone
can save the Union- so soon as it is clearly ascertained that this will not be
done we shall dissolve the Union and seek by war the  redress denied us by
sister states. Depend on it sir, it will come to  this ere long…. As to giving
up our slaves, it is the least of our  thoughts…we will and we had better give
up our lives.

Surprisingly, this prudent and statesmanlike proposal was never properly
appreciated  in New York. To his chagrin, Hammond (’25) found that virtually
everyone in the United States except the South Carolina “chivalry” had drifted
to the extreme periphery of the American political tradition, and their
misunderstandings impeded his efforts to foment military conflict. Apart from
hostilities with Mexico and the occasional duel, Hammond and his  fellow alumni
were prevented from dealing out death until the Civil War, the unfortunate
results of which impeded them from dealing out terror  until Reconstruction.

One historian has noted that between 1820  and 1835 “The emergence of a coherent
proslavery argument coincided with a shift of Southern leadership from the
divided and demoralized state  of Virginia to the homogeneous cotton growing
state of South Carolina.”  Proslavery arguments developed and kept pace with
sectionalist  agitation. Prior to the Missouri Compromise, South Carolina’s
congressional delegation was both nationalistic and “soft” on slavery,  treating
it as a necessary evil (their opinions were not very different  from those
expressed by ambivalent Chesapeake Jeffersonians and by the  students of the
College).  The last time that an alumnus in Congress  conceded that slavery was
an evil was in a speech by George McDuffie  (’13) in 1827.   Three years later,
McDuffie had changed his mind. He  had moved from a “necessary evil” idea to
that of slavery as “a positive good”.

For too long, he growled, “…yielding to the influence of a mawkish and mistaken
humanity, our own statesmen have generally  concluded that slavery is a
political evil”. McDuffie then made a  proslavery speech in which he argued that
slavery benefited both whites  and blacks. McDuffie invoked traditional racist
ideas that black  inferiority was intrinsic and permanent.  “Sir, I do not
contend with  Aristotle, that the African race were made to be slaves, but I do
say  that God himself has drawn the line of discrimination; both moral and
physical, between them and the white race, in characters too strong ever to be
obliterated.” According to McDuffie the white Herrnvolk benefited from slavery
whether they held slaves or not.

Where all the  offices of dependent servitude are performed by a separate caste,
distinguished by color, and wholly excluded from all participation in
government, it is not to be doubted that the spirit of freedom is  rendered much
more proud and lofty among those that are free, by the  very contrast. No man in
the Southern States, no matter what his rank or station, would think of speaking
to the very poorest white man in the  community in the imperious tone of
insolence and authority which are  habitually used toward the white servants of
the North.

More  bellicose speeches by the alumni followed and the defense of slavery,
even at the cost of secession, was pursued even more vigorously after
Nullification waned. In 1836, Congressman Francis Pickens (‘27) insisted that

[O]ur system of domestic servitude, where all the sympathies and interests that
can bind individual capitalists and individual  laborers together exists, in the
same patriarchal system that existed in the first ages of society. Our
classification is into blacks and  whites, and we openly avow before the world
that we own the former,  through both intellectual and physical force. We have
nothing to conceal or disguise. …it may be said that what I have uttered tends
to  disunion. I did not come here, demagogue-like, to talk about the glories and
blessings of this Union.

Later in the same year, James  Henry Hammond (’25) took the next intellectual
step down. He rhapsodized that slavery was “the greatest of the great blessings
which Providence  has bestowed upon our region” and he defended not only slavery
but the  slave trade.  He cleverly constructed a Herrnvolk argument out of the
charge that South Carolina was an “aristocracy”:

Sir, any species  of emancipation with us would be followed instantly by civil
war between the whites and the blacks…[Abolitionists] have regarded our
institutions of slavery as most assimilated to an aristo¬cracy. In this  they
are right. I accept the term. It is a Government of the best.  …Slavery does
indeed create an aristocracy--an aristocracy of talents,  of virtue, of
generosity and courage. In a slave community, every  freeman is an aristocrat.
Be he rich or poor, if he does not posses a  single slave, he has been born to
all the natural advantages of the  society in which he is placed, and all its
honors lie open before him,  inviting his genius and industry. Sir, I do firmly
believe that domestic slavery, regulated as ours is, produces the highest toned,
the purest,  best organization of society that has ever existed on the face of
the  earth.

The idea that slavery was a positive good meant that its  masters and defenders
were the “aristoi”. Every time these “aristocrats” defended slavery, they
defended themselves; every time they praised  slavery they praised themselves;
since slavery was now “the greatest of  the great blessing Providence has
bestowed…” it is clear enough who they thought they were. They were God’s gift
to America. The immediate  practical question was obvious to Hammond, and he
posed it bluntly:  “Which do you prefer, a perpetuity of slavery or dissolution
of the  Union?  Apart from its political utility, the self congratulatory
preening implicit in the positive good proslavery argument made it  irresistibly
attractive. They believed themselves the best men of the  best society, “the
highest toned the purest, best…”, and the positive  good of slavery made
slaveholding and thus slaveholders a positive good.  Congressman Waddy Thompson
(‘14), who had been willing to march on  Washington in 1828, was also advocating
slavery as a positive good a  year after Hammond.  The remainder of South
Carolina’s congressional  delegation embraced the positive good orthodoxy soon
after. By affirming slavery they affirmed themselves.

The last of the alumni  polemicists to make even a grudging concession that
slavery was a  “necessary evil” was William Harper (’08) in his 1837 Memoir on
Slavery.  Between the late 1820s and the late 1830s the most politically
influential alumni made the shift to more radical argument that slavery  was a
positive good and their defense of slavery was often coupled with  disunionist
arguments. One of the consequences of the mutual  reinforcement which positive
good proslavery arguments and secessionist  sectionalism gave each other was to
increase the estrangement between  the advocates of these doctrines and the rest
of American society. In  1829, Congressman, later Governor, Stephen D. Miller
(’08) was one of  the first to argue that slavery was a positive good.   By
1832, Miller  had come to regard the United States as a foreign country, and he
said  so, oddly enough, on the floor of Congress:

I deprecate as  criminal all efforts by politicians to avail themselves of
foreign  assistance, whether it be in an attempt of union men in South Carolina
to enlist in their cause the General government, or the secretary of  state of
the United States, to propitiate Great Britain. My patriotism  prompts me to go
for South Carolina against the United States and the  United States against the
world.

The alumni were able  theoreticians, but in national politics they were better
at getting  themselves heard than followed. Even at home in South Carolina, the
extreme political views advanced by some alumni went too far for many
constituents. Some of the problems which the most radical alumni in  Congress
encountered during the Nullification crisis were created, not  in Washington,
but in their own state, and not by “Unionists”, but by  themselves. Occasionally
the vaunted rhetorical abilities of the alumni  were too powerful for their own
good, as nullifying Congressman, later  Senator, Warren Davis (‘10) found out.
His friend, later Senator and  President of the College, William Campbell
Preston (’12) wrote to  another nullifier that “I met Warren Davis last night
…he goes much  further than anyone I have met with and I think much too far, he
thinks  disunion the only remedy and has prepared himself to indicate that
opinion”.   Davis (’10) was ready for secession and Civil War in 1830.

Congressman Waddy Thompson (’14) reported that Davis (’10) gave an incendiary
stump speech in August of 1830 that “…was of so warlike a character as to  alarm
beyond measure. It created such an excitement that it was utterly  impossible to
resist. It was proposed to me to be instructed by the  votes of my district,
which I could not do”.  The audience to whom  Congressman Davis addressed his
oration was so terrified by his speech  that rumors of impending Civil War
spread quickly. The yeomen were not  enthusiastic about a war with the United
States. Congressman Thompson’s  constituents, knowing his belligerent views,
tried to restrain him from  helping Davis begin hostilities, by “instructing”
him with an  overwhelming vote against a Civil War. Because the rules of
gentleman’s  politics prevented Thompson from accepting instruction (it was
dishonorable to compromise with a coarse democracy), he refused to run  for
reelection under such circumstances. Davis’ speech cost the most  radical of the
alumni support in Washington and support at home. In  Congress, Davis met much
the same response when he asserted in the  tradition of the Federalists, that he
and his constituents were “not a  factious or seditious people” despite the fact
that in his opinion,  disunion “…must certainly follow…” a continuation of the
tariff.

​	The alumni and faculty who provided theories of politics and political
economy for the practical agitation of nullification and the tariff were an
intellectual vanguard that needed mass support, beyond the class of  “chivalry”
who were educated at the College. In particular, the  nonslaveholding yeomen
farmers of the upcountry would be crucial if the  Palmetto State had to form an
army and take the field against General  Jackson, as some anticipated. Thus
prescient alumni took a lively  interest in cultivating their support. In 1830,
Judge Ben Whitner (’09)  wrote to his friend James Henry Hammond (‘24) that the
people were  opposed to the nullification convention because they plausibly
feared  “disunion, civil war, bloodshed”, and that to accuse them of being
cowardly Yankee sympathizers would be counterproductive. “I am glad to  hear
that many of the yeomanry speak of attending the meeting in  Columbia on the
20th” …speakers should be… “conciliating and plain- stir up no angry passions,
nor create no prejudice and ill will by aspersing the motives and questioning
the patriotism of those who differ with  them.”

Yeoman support for a civil war over slavery was nil.  Support for a war over the
concrete problems and the complex of abstract issues constituting sectionalism:
tariffs, honor, nullification, states rights, strict construction of the
constitution, etc, was also weak.  This network of sectional debating points
initially got little popular  support because they seemed at best remote
abstractions and at worst  excuses for a war over slavery. Yeoman farmers were,
on the other hand,  convinced that equality with freed slaves would degrade
them; this was a negative stake they believed they had in slavery. In the north,
many  people were antislavery but few were active abolitionists; in the South
the mirror image obtained, many were opposed to abolition but few were  actively
proslavery. The yeomen opposed abolition more than they  supported slavery: the
alumni worked to transform the passive double  negative into an active positive.
It was not until the explicitly racist proslavery arguments highlighting the
“threat” of black equality were  alloyed with agitation for a sectional
disunionist answer to this  “threat” that the proposals of fire-eating alumni
got much in the way of popular support. The tradition of racism (which was
ubiquitous in  varying degrees in every state, North or South) created a synergy
between proslavery advocacy and secessionist sectionalism which was the  source
of whatever mass support the men who advocated secession  garnered.

While he was president of the College, Cooper had  conspired unsuccessfully to
leverage nullification into separate state  secession without mass popular
support. The results were disheartening,  After he was ousted in 1834, he
intensified his conspiratorial  activities with South Carolina’s Congressional
delegation, attempting to foment secession until his death in 1839. In an 1835
letter to Hammond, he wrote “the sooner we separate, the better….  In 1836
Cooper  continued his conspiracy with his former students in Washington. They
intended to use the controversy over the receipt of abolition petitions  by
Congress as a vehicle for disunion; Cooper wrote:

Your table  will be loaded with insolent petitions, till the House will say
there  must be a decisive report on them, and they will be referred to a
committee. In this case I should leave the house, because I hold the  house has
no right to appoint a committee and report the question… Pray  get the most able
and spirited Southern members to meet in caucus till a plan can be devised… you
and Pickens and Waddy Thompson have well  sustained the southern character; but
you are young members and you have a most difficult game to play, and you should
I think force the honest  Southern members into private caucuses to lay down the
plan on which you must finally act. I foresee it will end in dissolution of the
union,  for we have no safety in any other measure. … [Refers to communication
with William Campbell Preston in the Senate] “McDuffie’s military ardor  is at
least well timed. We shall need all the courage we can muster…  Pray remember me
kindly to your colleagues Pinckney, Thompson, and  Pickens

One historian has written of this letter, “There it was,  the smoking gun, the
revolutionary plot, the proof of a conspiracy to  break up the Union.”  The men
mentioned,  Congressman Pickens (‘27),  Congressman Thompson (‘14),  Congressman
Pinckney (‘14), Governor  McDuffie (‘13), and of course, Congressman Hammond
(’25) himself were a  phalanx of  nullifiers. It was in this context of
secessionist  conspiracy that Congressman Pinckney (’14) former editor of the
Mercury, broke ranks by offering the slightest procedural concession when he
proposed to accept and immediately table all abolition petition rather  than to
refuse to accept them at all. His miniscule apostasy, while  supported by many
outside South Carolina, was very unpopular with his  constituents and former
friends. It proved the end of his political  career despite otherwise impeccable
credentials as a proslavery  advocate.

Chastened but not daunted by his failures, Cooper  wrote in 1837 to Senator
William Campbell Preston ('12) of ongoing  attempts in both South Carolina and
Washington to instigate the combined secession of the Gulf States over
abolitionism.

We want to call  an antiabolition meeting…The division of opinion among the
slave states  paralyzes us. You, who are on the spot, [Washington] can probably
advise us what tone our resolutions ought in point of prudence to take. We are
ready and willing to go all lengths, and cut the knot if needful; and  quickly
too. We think we can depend upon being followed by Georgia,  Alabama,
Mississippi and Louisiana. If so, I would cut the cable and  steer away. Send us
your instant opinion how far we may prudently  venture. Governor Butler has
written you recently and today he writes to Calhoun, with a request to
communicate with you. I fear the doctrines  of neutrality and international law
will prevent our annexing Texas  unless indeed we are forced into secession.

The most radical  alumni in Congress from the era of nullification on were
willing to risk all and lose all to perpetuate slavery. These committed
disunionists  railed with an increasing ferocity and without regard for the
consequences. If they lost slavery they lost themselves, and they would  be
shorn of identity, imprisoned in a desperate condition described by  one
political philosopher as “a false, distorted and reduced mode of  being”.  The
alumni believed themselves a slaveholding aristocracy with  superior powers of
moral discernment, specific to their identities as  masters. They literally
thought themselves men of superior honor and  moral strength. Francis Pickens
(’27), who, like Samson, did not quail  from a suicide mission, raged about the
abolition petitions.  Hypersensitive to language and hysterical in his
politicized self  absorption, he defended his damaged self esteem using highly
intemperate language.

If this House was to be made the tribunal before  which we were to be traduced
and slandered, if we were to be made the  instru¬ments through which
denunciation and falsehood are to be heaped  upon one half of this confederacy,
if we are to sit here and have our  feelings harrowed up and wounded by those
who pretend to be our  brethren, better, far better, for us to grasp the pillars
that support  the noble edifice of our Union, and make them rock and totter to
their  deepest foundations, even though we, together with the Philistines,
should be overwhelmed and perish in one universal ruin.

Pickens’  fragile feelings were harrowed with shocking insensitivity. Despite
the  extremity of their situation, Pickens still found it queer that even the
hardiest of proslavery advocates outside South Carolina were reluctant  to
advocate “universal ruin”.  Immediately after John Quincy Adams  presented
Congress with a petition from slaves, Pickens declared it

…inimical to union. This produced immense excitement at first. I soon found in
the meetings on the subject that there was too much cowardice and humbug among
the Southern men to make any decided resistance. You would be  astonished to see
how many men became alarmed at the dissolution of the  union. …I am very much
alone here, as being an Ultra.

As one  historian has noted, the “Gag Rule” controversy “was one of those rare
moments when a culture’s way out ultras captured the mainstream’s  worried
attention”  The mainstream had good reason to worry.  By the mid 1830s, led by
alumni of the College, South Carolina was once again  preparing for more than a
war of words.

In 1835, Governor McDuffie (‘13) had taken the nom de plume “Fredrick” and was
doing his best to  transform South Carolina into Prussia with mild weather. A
series of  seven letters appeared in the Charleston Mercury under the name of
“Fredrick” in October 1835. These letters urged preparation for  secession and
civil war. “Frederick” made the analogy between South  Carolina and Prussia,
insisting on realpolitik, that “might makes  right”, that military science be
taught in the College by a new  professor, and that war should be taught to the
undergraduate cadets  during the summers.  One writer noted the military
preparations being  made: “Governor McDuffie, “Fredrick” as they have termed him
here, has  been drilling his regiment for two days.”

 McDuffie (’13) wrote portentously to James Henry Hammond (’25) in 1836 that

I regard the separation of the slaveholding states from the union as an  event
absolutely inevitable and all my efforts for the past two years  have been
devoted to the work of preparing this state for every possible emergency. You
will see the spirit of the people in their selection of a Chief Magistrate with
a view to his military qualifications.”

The separatist tradition of military preparation extended to Washington. In 1840
F.H. Elmore (‘19), who had been a member of the previous Congress, got a letter,
only part of which survives so its author is uncertain.  It was from a
Carolinian, probably a member of the Congressional  delegation, someone who had
access to the Secretary of War. The  Secretary and the writer had a long
conversation and decided that:

As long as the subtreasury system was operating, that as a much of the  money
raised in the state should be expended among our citizens. That it was likewise
important as a Southern man…that he should encourage a  foundry for Balls as
they might be needed in other wars than those of a  foreign nature. He assured
me that everything should be done upon that  subject which lay in his power and
that he had already written to you  fully upon the subject.

Like Elmore (‘19), McDuffie (‘13) was one of the many alumni who connected the
defense of slavery with the  advocacy of secession. In 1836 the alumni
association of the College was transformed into “The South Carolina Society for
the Advancement of  Learning” (SCSAL), and membership was opened to all college
graduates.   Governor McDuffie (’10) inaugurated the aged Judge William Henry
DeSassure as the first president. DeSassure had been one of the original
sponsors of the College in 1801. In his speech he reminded the members  of the
SCSAL that the College had been founded to unify the education of the political
leadership within the state. He asked “…[A]t the end of  thirty years an
interesting question arises, what has the College done,  and what are its
fruits?” The judge was pleased to note that the alumni  of the College, “…fill,
as they deserve to fill, the most important  public stations… nine of eleven of
our representatives in the halls of  Congress, …six of the eleven judges…and
many of the seats of our  legislative assemblies are filled with able men who
derived their  nourishment from that source.”   The members of the SCSAL
produced some  widely reprinted proslavery propaganda, they were important in
the  national  and state politics, and according to “A Member”, the SCSAL was a
secessionist organization.

The College alumni and to a lesser  extent the faculty contributed to the
construction secessionist thought  and every variety of proslavery doctrine.
They were particularly  associated with the development of the idea that slavery
was a positive  good. By the mid 1850s, many agreed with Congressman L.M. Keitt,
when he stated bluntly: “We affirm it [slavery] to be normal, just and
beneficent.”  Although some of the proslavery arguments formulated by  alumni
took the form of book length treatises, more commonly speeches  supplemented by
articles in periodicals and newspaper editorials were  preferred. The alumni
developed a cluster of proslavery arguments in  their extended conflict with
abolitionism, and as abolitionism became  more powerful, the alumni became more
strident. These proslavery  arguments became more numerous and extreme and the
rationales provided  were more varied as abolitionism became stronger. The
tendentious  intellectual output of alumni insisted that slavery was just and
proper  because freedom for slaves was immoral, illegal and/or impractical. Most
of these arguments could be deployed in ad hoc combinations to suit the
preferences and prejudices of the intended audiences, and in  particular,
fire-eating secessionists used them with devastating effect  throughout the
lower South. Every printed speech and pamphlet merely  hints at a plethora
extemporaneous stump speeches given at political  barbecues. The proslavery
arguments the alumni constructed included  arguments from Lockean property
rights; organicist hierarchy arguments;  arguments of policy from the economic
or social impracticality of  abolition; strict constructionist
constitutionalism; traditional racist  ideas plus new “scientific” forms of
racism; and scriptural  justifications like the curse of Ham and the Pauline
epistles.

The alumni sometimes defended slavery with heavy handed arguments from the
Lockean natural right to property. Whatever else they were, slaves were  as a
matter of positive law property, and some of the crudest and most  offensive
arguments in favor of the “peculiar institution” amounted to  little more that
the bald assertion that slaves were chattel. In  Congress during controversy
over Gag Rule, Waddy Thompson (‘14) said  “Slaves have no right to petition,
they are property not persons…”.   Henry Laurens Pinckney (‘12) was so incensed
that John Quincy Adams  would introduce a petition from slaves that he said “he
would just as  soon have supposed that the gentleman from Massachusetts would
have  offered a memorial from a cow or a horse- for he might as well be the
organ of one species of property as another. Slaves were property.”   This kind
of proslavery argument, which was a legacy of the colonial  era, was usually
buttressed by other, more sophisticated arguments,  because such arguments
inevitably begged the question of whether the law being appealed to was morally
justifiable, and nineteenth century  America had few legal positivists. One
notorious exception was the  inimitable Thomas Cooper.  He was publicly
committed to the idea that  “(R)ights are what society acknowledges and
sanctions, and they are  nothing else.”  He agreed with Bentham’s utilitarian
“nonsense on  stilts” view of rights when he insisted “…we talk a great deal of
nonsense about the rights of man. We say that man is born free, and  equal to
every other man. Nothing can be more untrue; no human being  ever was, now is,
or ever will be born free.”  In 1823, Cooper became  embroiled in a newspaper
battle over the rights of black people to  marry. He wrote

…people of color are, in every part of the United States, considered not merely
by the populace, but by the law, as a  permanently degraded people; not
participating as by right, of the civil privileges belonging to every white man,
but enjoying what civil  privileges they possess, as by right and grant, as a
matter of favor  conceded by the law, and revocable by law.

Strict constructionist proslavery constitutionalism was one of the stronger
arguments deployed by College alumni in defending their peculiar institution.
Even the  best constitutional lawyers in the north, such as Daniel Webster, had
trouble meeting it directly because of the clear historical evidence in  its
favor. The alumni in Congress believed that the northern majority  was imposing
a factious new interpretation on an old document. Far from  capricious, the
traditional South Carolinian reading was historically  accurate, at least for
the Palmetto State. A verbatim identical, yet  significantly different document
had been touted in Philadelphia and  Boston. While the term “spin doctor” did
not exist in the eighteenth  century, the founding fathers in every state had
understandably fudged  the issue of slavery in 1789. For reasons of state they
deceived their  audiences, and alas, perhaps to some extent themselves, in
giving  contradictory assurances to their home states. They could not at that
time afford the price of clarity. By the middle of the nineteenth  century the
chickens were coming home to roost and the agonizing price  of clarity would be
paid with interest in 1861.

Since the alumni  of the college were among the best educated politicians in the
country,  and many of them were able constitutional historians as well as
lawyers, it was difficult to contradict them when they cited the debates on
ratification, the document itself, and the constitutional  interpretations
proffered by members of the first Congress. In 1848,  Congressman Thomas
Woodward (‘26) noted with uncomfortable accuracy,  that “The Constitution,
therefore, in requiring fugitive slaves to be  delivered up, enlarged the rights
of the master, and diminished the  rights of the slave.”  No wonder
abolitionists appealed to a higher law. Congressman Mark Anthony Cooper (‘19) of
Georgia stated on the floor of the House in 1840, that it was common knowledge
that the abolition of  slavery meant disunion and that “this subject was urged
as early as  1790…”.  Conservative, strict constructionist proslavery arguments
formed a tradition that stretched from the Federalist sources of  Congressman
Reid’s (’08) speech on the Compromise of 1820 to the  election of Abraham
Lincoln. As Congressman Landrum  (‘27) of Louisiana  stated in 1860: “I hope I
shall be able to show that we have some first  rate proslavery legislation in
the Constitution before I get through  with this argument… slavery was a good
thing but it had a bad name.”   The alumni made a coherent and historically
accurate argument, but  coherence and accuracy aren’t everything. The problem
with the  Constitutional argument is that it ultimately leads to questions about
the moral status of the Constitution. The answers to these questions in
proslavery apologetics were grounded in nature and in God.

The  idea that slavery is proper because societies naturally form an organic
hierarchy is an ancient idea that goes back at least at least as far as
Aristotle. William Harper (‘08) argued in 1837, that differences in  function
were natural to different segments of society and moreover that these
differences had divine sanction. “…[I]f as Providence has  evidently decreed,
there can be but a certain portion of intellectual  excellence in any community,
it is better that it should be unequally  divided. It is better that a part
should be fully and highly cultivated, and the rest utterly ignorant.”  Harper’s
advocacy of utter ignorance  was directed the most learned men in South
Carolina. The audience for  Harper’s oration, the SCSAL, was de facto the South
Carolina College  alumni association. He was preaching to the choir.

The organicist theory of a naturally hierarchical society endorsed by Harper,
which in the modern world has informed a strain of conservative thought from
Burke to Gentile, was given a specifically racist twist by Senator James Henry
Hammond (‘25) in his incendiary “Cotton is King” speech of 1858

In all social systems there must be a class to do the mean duties to  perform
the drudgery of life. That is a class requiring a low order of  intellect and
but little skill… Such a class you must have, or you would not have that other
class which leads progress, refinement and  civilization. It constitutes the
very mudsills of society…we… call them  slaves. Your slaves are white, of your
own race; you are brothers of one blood. They are your equals in natural
endowment of intellect and they  feel galled by the degradation. Our slaves do
not vote. We give them no  political power.

This defense of slavery was among the most  radical deployed by the alumni of
the College because it implies that  every working class, which inevitably forms
the bulk of any society, are inevitably slaves de facto. This sort of “mudsill”
argument, often  reprinted by abolitionist newspapers, infuriated those people
condescendingly referred to by Congressman L.M. Keitt (’43) and others  as the
“white slaves of the north”.  Northern wage laborers did not  think that they
were or should be slaves, nor did they think work  intrinsically degrading.
Supercilious arguments based on organic  hierarchy, badly out of step with the
American political tradition in  the mid nineteenth century probably produced
more antislavery backlash  within the Northern “mudsill” than anything else.

The argument  from policy that slaves should not be freed because neither
colonization in Africa nor coexistence with whites was a practical possibility,
was  an important development in proslavery apologetics because, unlike
“mudsill” theories, it found substantial support outside the South  Carolina
gentry. This argument from policy, partially established in  R.R. Reid’s (’08)
speech against the Compromise of 1820, was amplified  by writers such as Thomas
Cooper and William Harper (‘08), who focused  on the political economy of
slavery. Harper, who had served as Senator  in from South Carolina in 1826, is
best known for his proslavery speech  given in 1837 to the SCSAL, printed under
the title of Memoir on  Slavery,

Harper’s earlier proslavery writing has received less  attention because it is
shorter and less elaborate. Yet in 1828, before  he became the author of the
Ordnance of Nullification, Harper wrote a  noteworthy essay for the first issue
of the newly founded “Southern  Review”. This periodical, which was founded by
leading Carolinian  politicians with the intent of imbuing “our young men with
genuine  Carolina sentiments and feelings”, contained a high proportion of
contributions by College alumni.  Harper’s essay, on the “Colonization
Society”, argued that the colonization of freed slaves in Africa was an
impractical chimera, which if implemented would be fatal to blacks and
catastrophic to whites. The most damning analogy Harper made, that the  Northern
abolitionists were to the Amis des Noirs as South Carolina was  to Santo
Domingo, hung the albatross of Jacobin Terror and race war on  the neck of even
the most conservative and tentative of proposals to end slavery.  Harper had
struck a nerve. When this essay was published in  1828, South Carolina still had
living citizens who had fled revolution  in Santo Domingo, and the atrocity
stories they told and retold  convinced listeners that there could be no
concession to racial  Armageddon.  The defense of slavery was equally important
in Harper’s  writings on nullification. The tariff, according to Harper, “…was
the  symptom instead of the disease”. Nullification was necessary, he argued,
because a Leviathan federal government, hostile to slavery, would  interfere
“…with your free negroes first; and afterwards your slaves.”

What is most significant about the proslavery argument from  policy is that in
the late 1820s and 1830s political economists  associated with nullification
like Harper (’08) and Cooper were busy  destroying the middle ground sought by
conscience stricken Chesapeake  fencesitters.  Simultaneously these proslavery
agitators were advocating Nullification and secession even to the extremity of
Civil War. If  emancipation and colonization were prohibitively expensive and
thus  practically impossible, and if racial antipathy made most whites reject
coexistence with freedmen, then there was no ameliorative middle ground: either
slavery forever or apocalyptic race war. By providing  intellectually
substantial arguments claiming that the nebulous hopes  for gradual emancipation
were utopian illusions, the arguments from  policy helped shrink the moderate
center and polarize the issue of  slavery into a binary set of irreconcilable
alternatives. In the long  run, even the ingenuity of Calhoun’s conservative
constitutionalism  could not arrest this destructive tendency. This erosion of
an  intellectually respectable middle ground undermined the popularity of  the
traditionally more moderate “necessary evil” proslavery argument,  and the slide
toward Civil war gained momentum. From the perspective of  many radical alumni,
slavery could be either necessary or an evil, but  not both.

The increased polarization was reflected in an 1842 speech by Congressman John
Campbell (‘19):

…I will take the occasion to express my unqualified disapprobation of
admissions that I have heard made even by Southern gentlemen on this  floor,
that slavery is a great moral and political evil, which has  weighed and is
weighing like an incubus on the South. This is an  admission, or rather
assertion, which no representative of the South is  authorized to make… I deny
that the South has languished under its  influence, or that her progress, either
morally or politically has been  retarded by its existence among us.

The gradual disintegration  of the “necessary evil” argument carried momentous
practical  implications. For Congressman Campbell (‘19), agitation over slavery
would be resolved as it had for Congressman Hammond (‘25), into  “…one
question, and one only, which lies at the bottom of this subject--and  that is,
the dissolution of the Union. And in relation to that, I say,  rather let the
Union be dissolved, even if with it the last hope of  political liberty should
perish from the face of the earth.”

​	 The proslavery argument based upon scripture and its underlying
religious belief was one of the most influential because in antebellum  America
the authority of the Bible was virtually unchallenged. The long  and detailed
religious defense of slavery given by Congressman L.M.  Keitt (‘43) in 1858, was
only the last in a long series of such  orations.   Apart from proslavery
political speeches and newspaper  editorials which they also occasionally
authored, alumni who served as  clergymen were conspicuous leaders in the
defense of slavery who  contributed powerful sermons and learned Biblical
exegeses. College  alumni were conspicuous in the antebellum religious
controversies  surrounding slavery, which necessarily had an ecclesiastical and
implicitly a political and sectional dimension as well. The curse of  Ham, Old
Testament regulations condoning slavery, and certain Pauline  injunctions were
invoked by such eminent alumni as James Henly Thornwell (‘31), Basil Manly
(’21), Henry Hilliard (‘26), William Capers (‘27),  and by a host of less
prominent divines. Reverend Hilliard (’26), who  was also served as a professor
at the University of Alabama and as a  Congressman, supported the work of Bishop
Capers (’27) in splitting the  Methodists along sectional lines in the 1845 over
the issue of slavery.  Basil Manly (’20) took credit for doing the same with the
Baptists, and  it is significant that these two denominations alone accounted
for  three-quarters of the Southern population. A large part of the balance  was
made up of Presbyterians, and President of the College James Henly  Thornwell
(‘31), took the initiative in splitting his denomination.

Reverend Thornwell, who was a professor at and eventually became president of
South Carolina College, not only kept the Presbyterians “sound’ on  slavery, he
made a Biblical defense of slavery a regular feature of his  classes at the
College. In a notebook from his junior class of 1855, one student recorded
Thornwell’s argument. In the first line he rejected  the polygenesis of the
scientific racists in favor of the Biblically  sanctioned unity of the human
race. Although he invoked the letter of  Paul to the Ephesians in his support,
he also emphatically insisted that the spirit of the law sustained slavery. His
exegesis was  self-consciously contrary to that of leading abolitionists, like
Channing, who was mentioned by name in his lecture.  Thornwell also  published
proslavery sermons, and his influence within his denomination  is attested to by
the wide circle of proslavery ministers with whom he  corresponded.  Although
his ingrained conservatism made him a reluctant  secessionist, he reconciled
himself to that, as well.  Then and now,  politics and religion could not be
completely separated.

The  hardening of opinion on slavery is clearly evident in the career of  Basil
Manly. In April of 1821, Manly was one of the few antislavery  students on
campus. He wrote a speech for the Euphradian society called  "On the
Emancipation of Slaves" . In this speech Manly argued that  slavery was a
particularly dangerous issue because it contributed to the growth of
antagonistic parties, and the only way to avoid bitter  factional disputes on
this issue was to abolish slavery and colonize the freedmen, who were assumed to
be dangerous to whites. Manly (’21),  whose graduation had been marked by the
best fight that his classmates  had ever seen a Baptist preacher make, soon
became a very conscientious  advocate of slavery. In 1837, while he was still in
the pulpit of a  Charleston church, he delivered a series of proslavery sermons
on “The  Duties of Masters and Servants” based upon the assumption that “slavery
was legal, good and scriptural”.   He continued this proslavery advocacy while
he served as president of the University of Alabama from 1837 to  1855, and his
proslavery views led him to split the Baptists. Manly,  along with several other
alumni, exerted a long term influence on the  political and moral thinking of
the planters sons he taught in  Tuscaloosa. His political views were extreme,
even by alumni standards,  and by 1850 he was an open secessionist who preferred
"extermination" to "submission":

It is question of life & death, far more  portentous than any which was involved
in our revolutionary struggle. We must be free from the dictation and control of
the North or perish…  What is to come of secession I do not know. There is at
least a hope it  may save us. But, if not, we shall perish in a manly assertion
of our  rights. I am for it with every conviction of my understanding and every
feeling of my heart…I am with S.C. extermination is to be preferred  rather than
submission to mischief framed by a law…I am in earnest, cut  the cord…My father
fought in the revolution for independence, -not  union.

He wrote to his son in 1861 from Montgomery, “The great  Congress met yesterday-
the southern congress –to form a Southern  Confederacy. I thank God I have lived
after thirty years waiting to see  this moment.”  In 1861 he repeated the widely
held view that the schism  within the Baptist church foreshadowed secession, and
he was forthright  about his influence in bringing secession about:

 It has been  acknowledged again and again by men in the highest positions, that
 the  action of our convention gave the first impulse in the right direction  to
 the southern mind. …Thomas RR Cobb of Georgia made that statement in  my
 presence to Mr. R.W. Barnwell. …[W]hether for good or ill, I have had much to
 do with the whole thing. It was I who took the steps and wrote  the Alabama
 resolutions in ’44 which separated the denomination. This  was the entering
 wedge driven far in. The Methodists followed next. Then I wrote the paper
 passed by our convention. And I was called upon to  open the first meeting of
 our convention of the people [the Alabama  secession convention] with a prayer-
 also the first meeting of the  Southern [Confederate] Congress … Well, I think
 we are right; and I do  not shrink from the responsibility of all that I have
 done.

When Reverend Manly said the opening prayer in the Alabama secession
convention, he must have been gratified to see so many of his former  students
in the hall.

​	Shortly after Manly (’21) drove the  entering wedge into the Baptists,
Bishop William Capers (’27) gave the  wedge another rap by splitting the
Methodists.  Capers’ strongly  insisted that scripture endorsed slavery. Like
Manly, he found it  impossible to disentangle his theological judgements from
ecclesiastical schism, which in turn had secessionist political implications.
Capers  “claimed for the South a superior civilization, [and] attacked Northern
church editors for supporting congressional acceptance of abolition  petitions”;
moreover he argued that abolition was “foreign alike from  the constitution and
aims of the Methodists as applied to the South.”

​	The idea that slavery had a Biblical sanction won wide support in the
South, and the ecclesiastical schisms that attended the controversy won  equally
wide support, helping to create sectional churches and a  sectional identity on
the basis of proslavery theology. In a speech  against the Compromise of 1850,
Congressman William McWillie (’17) of  Mississippi, noted the alarming
implications of the religious schisms of the 1840s prompted by the
ecclesiastical results of proslavery  theology:

Why, sir, even already, so far as the Union of the  States was dependent on the
union of the Churches, we have in some of  them actual, practical dissolution.
We have the Methodist Church North,  and the Methodist Church South. The same
division has taken place in the Missionary Baptist Church-- and it is with
difficulty that the union of the Presbyterian Church is retained. Are not these
facts portentous?  Ought they not to warn us of danger? The same causes that
have made a  Church North and a Church South will, if not arrested, make a
Confederacy North and a Confederacy South--like causes produce like  effects.
Discord separated the Churches--discord will separate the  States.

The only proslavery argument which was as widely  acceptable to the bulk of
yeoman whites as the argument from scripture  drew upon traditional racist
beliefs about the inferiority of black  people. R.R. Reid (‘08), the Congressman
who had opposed the antislavery provisions of the Compromise of 1820,
articulated the ubiquitous and  longstanding racist views of the Herrnvolk in
his diary for 1833. “Judge L. said the other day … that a black man, a free man,
has as much right to be President of the U.S. as Andrew Jackson. I don’t believe
it. This is a government of white people, made by whites for the benefit of
whites. …Society can’t exist without slavery in some shape or form, and  that
black slavery is preferable to white.”

John C. McGeehee  (’21), later the president of the Florida secession
convention, gave a  speech in 1851 in which he voiced much the same traditional
view.  Abolition was improper and immoral, he argued, because “The black race
is naturally lazy, indolent, improvident, and unscrupulous…”  He  proposed to
secure slavery through secession and Civil War. In addition  he correctly
anticipated that the specter of black equality would assure the loyalty of
nonslaveholding whites. The same sort of traditional  racism is seen in James
Henry Hammond’s (’25) observation: “My  conclusions are that, except in speech,
they [Blacks] are inferior to  some other brutes. Dogs and horses are more
sagacious and faithful.”  In Washington, Congressman W.W. Boyce, (’36?) who
insisted that “I am  conservative by education, by all the instincts of my
nature…”.  offered similar opinions on the floor of Congress. In a speech on the
annexation of Cuba in 1855, he insisted “The philosophy of African  slavery
consists in the superiority of the white race; where this  superiority is
wanting, there is no basis for the institution to rest  upon, and it crumbles
like a house without a foundation.”

The  traditional racist opinions held by alumni of the College (and of  course,
not just them) were bolstered and given a gloss of intellectual  respectability
by the articulate and well-educated scientific racists of the “American School
of Ethnology”.  Dr. Josiah Nott (‘24) was the  alumnus who had the greatest
influence upon the scientific reinforcement of traditional racist arguments.
Nott was one of a small number of  scientists who investigated comparative
anatomy, particularly  comparative crania, with reference to the intrinsic
racial differences  these allegedly demonstrated.   In the 1840s and 1850s Nott
published a  number of important proslavery tracts, and he continued this well
after  the end of the Civil War. He wrote his friend James Henry Hammond that
the “increasing popularity of scientific racism keeps pace with the  increasing
radicalism of public opinion in politics.”

​	Nott (’24) made a polygenetic argument that contradicted Genesis and
adduced  evidence from the shape and size of skulls to sustain the proposition
that blacks and whites were separate species. Ethnology, or  “Niggerology” as
Nott sometimes styled his new discipline, consumed much of Nott’s time, though
he practiced medicine in Mobile and lectured at  the University of New Orleans.
Unlike Samuel Cartwright, the other  prominent scientific racist who lived and
wrote in the South, Nott  confronted directly the fact that he was undermining
biblical literalism in arguing that blacks and whites were different species
with different origins. While he disingenuously tried to divert attention from
the  antiscriptural implications of his argument, he was frank with his  friend
James Henry Hammond, “…just get the damned stupid crowd safely  around Moses and
the difficulty is at an end.”

​	Josiah Nott’s  (’24) most recent biographer has emphasized the influence
that Cooper  exerted on his student, and the connection between Nott and Cooper
was  recognized by contemporaries.  During his lifetime Cooper evinced a deep
sympathy with Nott’s desire to “…cut loose the natural history of  mankind from
the Bible…”.   Nott’s writings bear comparison with those  of his teacher,
Thomas Cooper. Cooper was one of the unacknowledged  pioneers of scientific
racism, having written as early as 1835 that  blacks were “an inferior variety
of the animal, man.”  Cooper’s  scientific racism formed an intellectual bridge
between racist  speculations of the late eighteenth century (Jefferson’s Notes
on the  State of Virginia, for example) and the secessionist American school of
ethnography.

​	Because of the conflict between scientific racism  and religion, Nott’s
polygenetic theories had only a limited appeal, but those who found it plausible
tended to be well educated and highly  placed. Nott (’24) had been a friend of
James Henry Hammond (’25) in  College, and their longtime correspondence had
convinced him of Nott’s  polygenetic theory. He wrote that he had “…the full
conviction that the  negro race differ as much from us as swine from dog to say
the least-  that they are a baboon on two legs gifted with speech…they will
learn  nothing, save nothing, and do nothing, except from fear constantly
instilled in them from the sight of the lash….”   He wrote to Nott “I  wish I
had your knowledge of comparative anatomy and physiology. Such  knowledge is at
the bottom of all great investigations in modern times.”

While the polygenetic theories of Nott and the other scientific racists never
developed a mass following during the antebellum period,  their defense of
slavery carried the same political prescriptions as the Biblical defense of
slavery which Nott so despised. He hoped that his  work would slow Northern
zealots who advocated abolition, an eventuality which would, in his opinion,
necessitate the dissolution of the Union  and force the South to “carve her way
out with a sword.”   Addressing  the Southern Rights Association of Mobile in
1850, Nott (’24) stridently rehearsed his views and closed with a political
program, “if any man  wishes to find the strongest of all arguments for a
severance of the  Union, and for the formation of a Southern Confederacy, he may
deduce it from the chain of facts that I have just detailed.”

The  disparate proslavery arguments formulated and popularized by the alumni  of
the College were generally consistent with one another. With the  exception of
the Biblical and scientific racist strains of proslavery  thought, the arguments
made by the alumni could be mutually reinforcing. The alumni indicted the
immorality, illegality, unconstitutionality and impracticality of abolishing
slavery in kaleidoscopic rearrangements of several related trains of thought, on
the stump, in the pulpit, and in  print. Nearly all of the men associated with
the College connected their defense of slavery with a secessionist political
program and they were  among the first in the nation to do so. The connection
between  proslavery thought and Southern (or Carolinian) nationalism was
pragmatic, not logical. Comparative crania and the curse of Ham have  nothing to
do with secession and conservative constitutionalism runs  counter to it.
Between the presidencies of Jackson and Lincoln the lure  of the non sequitur
became irresistible. There existed no antislavery  secessionists among the
alumni or any other group in South Carolina. The alumni who opposed secession
dwindled to a handful of marginalized  older men by 1860 and even they opposed
secession for the practical  reason that they believed the resulting Civil War
would be the political catastrophe which destroyed slavery. It is thus
impossible to sustain  the assertion that “the great progenitors of a new
proslavery ideology  in the South were the very men most opposed to
nullification, to  secession and to all the things for which the Nullifiers
stood.”   Cooper, Barnwell, Harper, Hammond, McDuffie, Pickens, Thompson, and
dozens of other men associated with South Carolina College would  disagree.

The alumni of the College were aware of the  similarity of thought, expression
and purpose in their polemical  political writings. Just after he had published
his oft reprinted  proslavery tract called the Clarkson Letters, James Henry
Hammond (‘24)  wrote that when he compared his work with Harper’s (‘08) earlier
Memoir  on Slavery, he found that “My friend Chancellor Harper and I sometimes
use identical phrases.”   This is not surprising. The only significant
difference between the argument Harper made in 1837 and the one Hammond  made in
1845 is that the latter was unwilling to make even the most  grudging concession
that slavery was an evil. Both deployed traditional  racist ideas, references to
divine sanction, and arguments from policy  based on political economy to
sustain their peculiar institution. Both  because of the fact that the alumni
shared a common set of formative  educational experiences and the fact that the
arguments in favor of  slavery drew upon an extremely narrow spectrum of
political thought, the propaganda produced by alumni has a tedious repetitive
quality which is less than absorbing.

​	The similarity of thought and  expression between alumni of the College
was as marked as the similarity between their views and those of the faculty.
The content of the  political views espoused by alumni and occasionally even
locutions used  were smudged with faculty fingerprints. The influence of Thomas
Cooper,  sometimes called “the schoolmaster of states rights” was especially
conspicuous. Cooper’s most notorious turn of phrase, that “we must  calculate
the value of the union” was used and reused and overused by an entire generation
of southern controversialists.

​	Except in  times of crisis, the alumni in Washington did not tally many
constructive achievements because they were not reliable party men. They were
not comfortable with the Democrats because of the connection with  Jackson,
unabashed majoritarianism and corrupt spoilsmanship. The Whigs  (or at least the
“Cotton Whigs”) were conservative, but consolidating,  unattractively associated
with loose construction, commercial interests  and protectionism. Because the
alumni had extensive ideological  commitments and a touchiness about personal
honor, they resisted party  discipline and kept harping on principles and ideas
instead of  legislative logrolling. Most alumni drifted into the Democratic
party,  but many were willing to bolt for Calhoun in 1844 and 1848 and they were
viewed with suspicion by party regulars.

​	The alumni held fast to the antiparty ideals inculcated in the College
and realized within  their home state Federalist atavisms like virtual
representation, the  refusal to accept instruction from constituents, a
prohibition on overt  electioneering and a stubborn disdain for spoilsmanship
which made them a party unto themselves, sui generis. As Congressman Frankiln
Elmore  (’19) wrote to James Henry Hammond (’25) “The harmony that existed when
I came here, amongst our own delegation, was the source of my greatest
pleasure. We had an honest little party who were separated from the two  great
contending parties, whose motives were free of suspicion and whose conduct
challenged censure…”.  During the period to which Elmore  referred, 1835-37, one
of two senators, W.C. Preston, (’12) (who later  became president of the
College), seven of eight members of the House,  and the Governor of the state
were all college alumni. George McDuffie  (‘13) identified himself as a
nullifier, with a small “n”, which he  thought nonpartisan.

Though I now act with those who call  themselves Democrats against the combined
powers of federalism,  tariffism and humbuggism as I formerly did with those who
called  themselves Whigs in resisting General Jackson’s high handed measures; I
protest now, as a nullifier against being amalgamated under the cognomen of
Democrats, as I did then against being amalgamated under the  cognomen of Whigs.

James Henry Hammond echoed the bellicose  rantings of his hearthbrush wielding
teacher, Thomas Cooper, when he  insisted in 1833 that “We of the South have no
more freedom than we can  maintain at the point of a sword.”  Cooper and the
extremist alumni he  taught were not a party, they were a self-conscious
revolutionary elite: what Basil Manly called “the entering wedge”. The most
prominent  politician from South Carolina was a moderate by comparison. John C.
Calhoun took up the conservative challenge of keeping these reactionary
revolutionaries in check, and they responded dialectically by forcing  him to
become progressively more radical, further estranged from the  mainstream of
American politics.  As one nullifying alumnus wrote just  before the Calhoun’s
“Fort Hill” letter: if Calhoun “goes all the way  with principle” he will be
sustained, but if not he will be replaced.   Calhoun needed to perform a
delicate balancing act, sustaining his  political base within the state’s
planting elite without succumbing to  their catastrophically unrealistic
political judgements.

Calhoun’s constitutional doctrines and political acumen were primarily important
because they offered a third alternative to the binary choice of  submission or
separation formulated by Cooper in his “calculate the  value of the union”
speech. Calhoun could thus restrain Nullification’s  true radicals like Hammond
(‘25) and Thompson (‘14) and Pickens (‘27)  and of course, Cooper himself, by
offering a bloodless and  intellectually rigorous alternative to their
doctrines, which diverted  away much of the support they needed. Of course
personal ambition and  factional infighting was also involved. Although
Calhoun’s status as  South Carolina’s spokesman or perhaps even personification
was secure,  the great man would eventually need a successor. By taking
individuals  into his confidence and dropping hints about future possibilities,
most  could be rendered more circumspect. Even the most headlong resident of
Mrs. Lindenberger’s boardinghouse on Capitol Hill, which included not  only
Calhoun, but also Preston (’12),

Thompson (’14), and Pickens (’27) and Hammond (’25) could be swayed by carefully
dropped hints.

One eminent historian called Calhoun the “Marx of the Master Class” but  this is
not apt.  Calhoun had much more in common with the great  scholastic writers of
the Middle Ages: he was the Aquinas of the Master  Class. Like the Scholastics,
only if one accepts the premises which  inform Calhoun’s work can the subtlety,
lucidity and power of his  intellectual tour de force be appreciated. The
analogy runs still  deeper: Calhoun’s dogmatic political and constitutional
writings are a  pseudosecular metaphysics, the synthetic American substitute for
systematic theology where the insoluble problem of evil is sublated into the
insoluble problem of majoritarianism.  Transubstantiation is to  state
interposition as Aquinas is to Calhoun as butter is to margarine.  Like Aquinas,
Calhoun produced writings which were the technically  impressive result of vast
mental horsepower, a series of logical and  intellectually sophisticated
constructions which were as futile as they  were implausible.

 Much of Nullification’s intellectual heavy  lifting was done by Calhoun in his
 anonymous South Carolina Exposition  of 1828 and the doctrine was generally
 associated with him, but he did  not publicly assent to Nullification until
 very late in the day, in the  Fort Hill letter of July, 1831.  By then his
 influence was most  decidedly conservative, thwarting the truly radical, and
 secessionist  nullifiers with metaphysics of state sovereignty and
 interposition.  James Henry Hammond (’25) complained in 1836 that he and others
 had been  “…for three years steadily cursing Calhoun…we… make a doctrine
 popular. Of a sudden, he comes forward, seizes it… and ruins the  impression
 which might have been made upon the whole country…  Calhoun,  sometimes accused
 of being a scheming secessionist, was in fact the true conservative of
 antebellum American politics. His treatment of  nullification as one of the
 many potential solutions (along with  functionally similar ideas like the
 concurrent majority and the dual  executive) to the problem of majoritarianism
 transformed it into  something other than a secessionist stratagem. Calhoun’s
 intellectual  acumen and shrewd political judgements nailed shut the door on
 Cooper’s  political Trojan Horse. For a generation his secessionist warriors
 were  trapped inside.

The radical alumni could not be contained  indefinitely. One historian noted
that after the reduction of tensions  with the Compromise Tariff of 1833, “There
came to be a saying in the  South “Once a Nullifier, always a Nullifier.” That
saying was  substantially true, it being understood, of course, that
Nullification  was abandoned as a specific remedy. The great majority of the
Nullifiers, in South Carolina and out, by easy stages and at different  times
became secessionists per se.”  The alumni who advocated  nullification had an
easier time making the transition to secession than most, and for many, no
transition was necessary. Ominously, the younger alumni who graduated during the
Nullification crisis were educated in  an environment of sectional hostility and
burdened with the increasingly shrill insistence that slavery was a uniquely
positive good which made  the South what it was and them what they were. As
William Harper (’08)  stated in his 1836 speech to the SCSAL,  “Slavery gives
South Carolina  its peculiar character.”   On the eve of the Civil War, a member
of  Cooper’s last class, Congressman Millege Luke Bonham (’34) described the
result: “Though but a boy at the time of that disinterested struggle  for the
constitutional rights of a whole section. I learned my first  political lesson
in that school.”

Congressman Bonham and others  like him helped reap in 1860 what Cooper and
others had sown a  generation earlier. Bonham stated on the floor of
Congress…there was a  time when disunion and secession sentiments were regarded
at least as  moral treason. ... I am aware that these doctrines were in former
days  looked upon with great horror; but gentlemen have not kept pace with the
progress of the times, and disunion is not now the bugbear that it once was.
His views on slavery were orthodox, “I look upon it as a moral,  social and
political blessing…”  Unsurprisingly, he insisted that “…as  to disunion, upon
the election of a black Republican… I am in favor of  immediate dissolution of
the union.”  For many alumni passionately  committed to slavery, secession and
Civil War was a proper response to a chronic series of insults to their identity
as masters. Threats a to  the legitimacy of slaveholding was a threat to the
legitimacy of  slaveholders. To “keep pace with the progress of the times”,
remedies  became more extreme, until the alumni of the college would not only
refuse to identify with the Whigs or Democrats, but would also deny the
existence of the American nation. As Senator Louis T. Wigfall (‘37)  informed an
audience full of foreigners on the floor of the Senate, “I  have said that there
was no such nation as the people of America; that  there was no such people as
the people of America; that there were no  citizens of any such political
community; that a man could not be a  citizen of the United States, for the
simple reason that it is  impossible for one to be a citizen of a country that
has no existence.   Wigfall took the political alienation of the alumni to its
logical  extreme.

Alumni of the College were, like the most committed of  the Northern
abolitionists, bitterly partisan ideologues that Henry Clay and other moderates
wished to render impotent with the Compromise of  1850. Much had changed since
Clay had brokered a compromise over  Missouri thirty years earlier. By
mid-century, a network of extremist  alumni dominated the political life of
South Carolina, made up a  majority of its representatives in Congress, and
leavened the politics  of the lower South. One observer noted disapprovingly,
“No arrangement  which can or will be made will satisfy South Carolina and it is
useless  to attempt it. He leading statesmen have satisfied themselves that they
made a bad bargain by entering the Union and they are desirous of  getting out
of it.”  Political opinion in the Palmetto State resolved  itself into two main
camps. Cooperationists were prudently mindful of  South Carolina’s isolation
during the Nullification crisis wished to  secede in concert with the other
slaveholding states. Immediatists were  political berserkers wished to secede
without delay regardless of the  consequences. Unionist sentiment or even
support for compromise measures was insignificant. As longtime secessionist
James Henry Hammond noted,  “The compromise measures of 1850… had not a friend,
as far as I know, in South Carolina…”

Not just the political doctrines, but as the  division of the churches suggests,
the religious beliefs and the moral  judgements of the alumni made them
increasingly antagonistic to what  they regarded as the shameless corruption of
Yankee politicians. Moral  secession preceded and promoted political secession.
Senator Andrew  Pickens Butler (’17) indicted the decline in the character of
Northern  politicians in one of his strident speeches against the Compromise.

Many who come here are committed exponents of irresponsible masses. They are
facile and publican politicians, who feel themselves bound to the law  of
obedience. …I think it may be safely said that those who yield most  to
transient popular prejudice, and indulge in habitual expressions of  love for
the people, would betray them soonest if there were an adequate temptation.

In the view of College alumni, to accept  instruction from constituents was
grossly immoral; no honorable man  would accept office at such a price. Few
alumni were exponents of the  masses, responsible or otherwise, and not even
their most determined  allies ever claimed that they indulged in habitual
expressions of love  for the people.

The locus of their identity was their status as  honorable slaveholders.
Slavery, honor and self were inextricably bound  up for the alumni. The
president of the University of Alabama, Basil  Manley (’20), was so extreme a
secessionist that he threatened to secede from the South if the southern
politicians did not spurn the  dishonorable Compromise of 1850. “I shall not be
willing to remain in  the Southern states if they submit and take compromises as
the best they can get, giving up gradually their property and their independence
and  honor.  Senator Robert Barnwell, (the former president of the College),
stated in opposing the Compromise of 1850 that slavery was the  foundation upon
which “their whole civilization rests, implicated with  it by ties so deep and
strong that their dissolution must place in most  imminent peril all things
which as men and patriots they should value  and protect.”  He argued that
slavery was a positive good and announced  that secession was probable. War was
preferable to the loss of self  worth entailed in the loss of slavery. "Unless
slavery is upheld as a  political institution essential to the preservation of
our civilization  and therefore to be maintained in the same high strain as
liberty itself we must become a degraded people."

​	The North and South, the  alumni claimed, had irreconcilable differences
of cultural identity.  Consequently, the practical issues reduced themselves, as
the politics  of identity inevitably must, to simple power politics with a
rhetorical  veneer of indignant moral superiority. Congressman W.F. Colcock,
(’23)  who may have been the only person in nineteenth century America to
believe that the Charleston Mercury was “lukewarm”, stated the case for
immediate Civil War in 1850. “Our interest is to have a distinct issue  made now
on a question in which the whole South is united and bring our  cause to a final
decision – We never will be as strong as we are now and if the North gains time
upon us we can never hope to meet them with  such strength as we have now.”
Congressman Henry Hilliard (’26) of  Alabama also advocated war rather than
compromise because he felt  degraded and denied due recognition by northern
Congressmen. He refused  to be saddled with crippling self-hatred: personal
“dignity” could not  be compromised:

[W]e shall never be stronger than we are today,  and we must therefore settle
today the interests of the great future  which is opening before us…For one,
sir, I am offering battle at once. I am for staking everything upon a single
field. We shall never be in  better condition for contesting it than we are now;
and if we are  hereafter to struggle for a foothold in Deseret and New Mexico, I
prefer to struggle for ascendancy in California too, that we may bear our
institutions with us to the Pacific coast. …Our honor and our existence  are
alike involved in the issue.  …Today every southern man walks erect, with
conscious dignity; he surveys the whole country with patriotic  pride; he sits
in the council of nations an equal among equals. He can  never consent to be
degraded from this position, to have the section  from which he comes placed
under the ban of the Government, and to have  the people whom he represents
brought into an inferior relation to it.

​	The alumni, unable to prevent a compromise in Washington that they
despised, and temporarily unable to reconcile “Cooperationists” and
“Immediatists” in South Carolina itself, were undaunted. They took up  the work
of destruction in the hope of creating from the debris of the  United States a
polity that was less threatening to their collective  traditions and more
flattering to their individual self conceptions.  Some, like James Henry Hammond
(’25), Francis Pickens (’27), or Franklin Elmore (’19) attempted to bolster
Southern nationalism at the Nashville Convention, a meeting of representatives
of the slave states intended  as a prelude to secession. Other radical alumni
like Maxcy Gregg, (‘35)  and Leonidas Spratt (’40) were conspicuous figures
during the 1850s in  the movement to reopen the slave trade, which they regarded
as a  necessary element in defending slavery itself.  The alumni were aware
that war would be the inevitable result of their agitation, though for  tactical
reasons they were not always candid about the likely  consequences. During the
intrigue and carefully choreographed  maneuvering surrounding the Nashville
Convention, James M. Walker (’30)  wrote to his co-conspirator Hammond (‘25),
“…we must follow disunion- I  don’t say this abroad, but in my opinion the north
and northwest will  not peaceably suffer our withdrawal … therefore might not
some argument  be made secretly between our leaders as to the preparation for
war… If  you are in earnest, let us prepare for war.”

​	In 1850 the alumni  did their best to disguise their instigation of the
Nashville Convention because the charge of “Carolina dictation” alienated
potential  supporters in other Southern states and made even sympathetic
Southerners bristle.  The Nashville Convention was widely viewed in more
moderate states as a prelude to cooperative secession. However, the  fact that
expatriate alumni represented not only South Carolina, but  also Georgia,
Alabama, Louisiana and Mississippi in Nashville made the  Carolinian connection
apparent. On the floor of the Senate, Sam Houston  charged that the Convention
was a treasonous plot concocted in South  Carolina. When Senator Butler (’17)
made a carefully worded and lawyerly denial, Houston produced evidence from the
Charleston Mercury going  back as far as 1835, indicating that such a convention
had been  advocated there for years.   Hammond (‘25), Elmore (‘19), Pickens
(‘27)  and the rest of South Carolina’s representatives had to find a new
political stalking horse.

​	The movement to reopen the slave trade, a horrifying traffic which had
been prohibited since 1808, began in  Charleston and alumni of the College were
among the most shameless and  vociferous of its advocates.  The acknowledged
leader of this agitation, Leonidas Spratt (’40) wrote an editorial in the
Charleston Standard in  1853 that provoked much comment and some emulation.
Spratt’s argument  was merely the next logical step down from the idea that
slavery was a  positive good. Spratt wrote, with grim lucidity, “Slavery is
right, and, being right, there can be no wrong in the natural means to its
formation.”  Alumni agitated for the reopening of the slave trade in  Alabama,
Florida and Mississippi as well. In his 1858 inaugural address  to the Florida
legislature, Governor Madison Perry (’32) wrote “slavery  as it exists in the
Southern states is morally right and ought to be  perpetuated.” Although he
insisted that “…had we the ability to import  and continue in servitude all the
negroes in Africa, they would be most  unquestionably benefited”, he counseled
against such eleemosynary  endeavors.  With a Civil war imminent, a controversy
over reopening the  slave trade would prove needlessly distracting and divisive.

The political views of the alumni allowed little room for subtlety or  nuance.
In the eyes of many alumni, Lincoln was perhaps not quite the  Antichrist but he
was certainly the AntiCarolinian. Abraham Lincoln was a symbol as well as a
candidate: Republicans were “Black Republicans’ who were abolitionists. William
McWillie (’17), in his 1859 farewell  message as Governor of Mississippi,
collapsed such distinctions

I  am aware that there are some persons, even at the South who do not take  so
strong a view as I do about the consequences likely to result from  the election
of an abolitionist or a Black Republican to the Presidency. But how they reason
to such a conclusion is past my finding out; or how they can find it in their
hearts to submit to a position so degrading,  is beyond my comprehension. …You
will perceive that I use the term  Abolitionist and Black Republican as
synominous (sic).

Free Soil  was equated with abolition, which was equated with the Republican
Party, which was equated with Lincoln. All and any of these Yankee
encroachments entailed loss of identity and dishonor to the South  collectively
and to the alumni individually. Congressman W.W. Boyce  (’36?) voiced the
apprehensions of many when he predicted the inevitable catastrophes that would
accompany a Republican victory in 1860

You must go on to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia, and all  other
places under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Federal Government. But you
cannot stop there, you must abolish the interstate slave trade. But you cannot
stop there; when the increase of free States gives you  the requisite majority
of three- fourths, you must demand the abolition  of slavery by an amendment of
the Constitution… [Y]our movement would,  if it is not arrested, and our
connection continued, compel you  ultimately to stand toward us in the position
of the national assembly  of France to the people of St. Domingo. Ah! We know
what that means …

From the perspective if the alumni, antislavery sentiment was  indistinguishable
from abolitionism, which was indistinguishable from  gross moral corruption
institutionalized the Republican Party and  personified in Lincoln, which was
tantamount to their collective  annihilation. In the opinion of many alumni,
Lincoln was utterly unfit  for the office of President because he was an
ill-disguised abolitionist and he did not entertain the conceptions of American
political history  that they did. Unlike Jefferson Davis, who had not been
degraded by  manual labor, Lincoln was a working man, not a gentleman. Senator
Wigfall (’37) said dismissively:

Your president elect a short time ago, in a speech, asked what is the difference
between a state and a  county? And he seemed to be really in quest of
information. Now, I was  not astonished at that, for I did not expect anything
better of him.  From a man who is taken up because he is an ex-rail splitter, an
ex-grocery keeper, an ex- flatboat captain, and an ex-Abolition  lecturer, and
is run on that question, I would not expect any great  information as to the
Government which he was to administer.

​	The alumni were confident that only a government without honor would be
represented by anything other than gentlemen, and a nation of tradesmen
governed by fops would be reluctant to make war. “It is all twaddle and
nonsense to talk about fighting and bloodshed in the event of the  dissolution
of the union.”  Louis T. Wigfall (’37) of Texas, who uttered this singularly
unlikely prediction on the floor of the Senate in March of 1860, insisted that a
Civil War would destroy the North rather than  the South and mercenary Yankees
would consult their purses. In a primary literal sense, he was, like so many
other alumni, out of touch with  reality: the nation was in fact preparing for a
Civil War. In a  secondary strategic sense the swaggering bluster toward the
North was  very reasonable indeed because Wigfall hoped these displays of menace
perhaps could ward off war: if a pusillanimous nation of dishonorable
shopkeepers could be cowed by roaring and raving and invective and  threats so
much the better. One could speak of them and to them using  words and tone,
which were grounds for a duel in South Carolina. One  could, with impunity, deny
that that they were either gentlemen or  Christians; the cowardly scoundrels
would themselves be publicly  insulted without issuing a challenge to duel. On
the floor of Congress,  Senator Wigfall (’37) taunted:

Now, when I call a man a  scoundrel, I mean what I say, and I will hold myself
personally  responsible. One of the complaints that we have against the North- I
make it, of course, not against all Senators or all members of the House of
Representatives- but unfortunately somehow or other they will not  send here at
all times representatives who are either gentlemen or  Christians, [laughter]
who will exercise the charity and good breeding  which belongs to the Christian;
or if they indulge their bad tempers,  will hold themselves responsible. It
renders our intercourse  unpleasant…. If you choose not to resort to legal
remedies which you  have, why not, when you use language that is personally
offensive, hold  yourselves personally responsible?

​	The violent cultural norms  inculcated in the College were pervasive in
the speech and actions of  prominent alumni in Congress. Contemporaries noted
warily that Senator  Louis T. Wigfall had a “monomania” on dueling.  It was
ubiquitous in his politics. Wigfall (’37) and other alumni of the College who
participated in national politics often described the sectional conflict over
slavery as a duel writ large. Using images and references taken  from the Code
of Honor, they repeatedly deployed analogies taken from  personal encounters
between hostile gentlemen. In March of 1861, after  the “Star of the West” had
been fired upon in Charleston harbor Wigfall  made the analogy to a punch in the
face. “The Star of the West swaggered into Charleston harbor, received a blow
planted full in the face and  staggered out. Your flag has been insulted:
redress it if you dare. You  have submitted to it for two months, and you will
submit to it forever.”  Later that evening Wigfall repeated himself, so that no
one should  mistake the intent of his “fighting words”. “I did say that the
vessel  had swaggered into Charleston harbor and, had received a blow in the
face, and had staggered out; and that this Secretary of War, who had  brought
the flag of this country in a condition to be fired at, had  never dared, from
that time to this, to resent the injury and  insult...”.

Wigfall was taunting the North with reference to  the rules of the Code of
Honor, which states; “When words are used, and a blow given in return, the
insult is avenged, and if redress be sought  it must be from the person
receiving the blow.” Moreover, a “wrong  cannot be considered aggravated if
borne patiently for some days…”.   Cognoscenti of the duel, like Wigfall,
understood his reference to mean  the collective dishonor of the Northern
nation; no honorable man could  associate with such a wretched individual and
analogously no honorable  nation could retain connection with a dishonored one.
The alumni often  used the symbolism of the duel and implicitly they personified
the two  sections as a small but honorable Southern gentleman in conflict with a
larger, but dishonorable, Yankee coward.

During the conflict  over nullification, Congressman Stephen Miller (‘08),
former Governor of South Carolina, told the House of Representatives regarding
the issue  of the tariff:

The question then would resolve itself into this – would a small man quietly
permit a larger one to take a position on his toes, and refuse to push him off,
merely because the larger one might  resent and punish him for doing what he had
the most unquestionable  right to do? …[T]he South Carolinian would say, my
friend, stands off my toes, or I will push you off: none but the coward will
submit to the  invasion of his personal rights. No one ought to act on the
supposition  of danger resulting from what he has a right to do.

The ethos  which saturated the College entailed a commitment to fight, if honor
demanded, even a much larger opponent: especially a much larger  opponent.  Dr.
Marion Sims (’32), who graduated the same year that  Miller gave his speech,
remembered the burdens of being an honorable but scrappy “little fellow” while
he was an eighteen-year-old student  joking with his classmates:

​	One day as we were sitting down to  dinner, at one o'clock, James Aiken
... playfully pulled my chair out  from behind me. I happened to see it, and
didn't sit down, but  mechanically turned around and pulled Witherspoon's chair
out from under him. Witherspoon didn't see me, and fell plump on the floor. He
was a  man of great dignity.... I hoped he would receive my apology in the
spirit in which it was tendered. He received it very gruffly, saying he  was not
at all satisfied. He could not get over the indignity offered  his person. After
dinner he spoke to me of the matter again. Again I  repeated my apology; he
still he was not satisfied. I then became  indignant, and said: "I have done all
that a gentleman can do. Now sir,  help yourself." I did not want to appear
before my comrades as if I were afraid of anything or anybody. If Witherspoon
had been a fool, he would have challenged me. If he had been a coward he would
have knocked me  over; for I was a little fellow and he was a big fellow.... I
am now  satisfied that if Witherspoon had been foolish enough to have challenged
me to a duel, I should have accepted it, even at the risk of losing my  own life
or killing him.

​	Sims offered Witherspoon a chance to  kill him over this silly horseplay
rather than appear to be afraid of  anything or anybody. The feisty one hundred
seven pound Sims (’32) was a little fellow who had a very short fuse and was
very sensitive about  maintaining his honor. The little fellow who had a hostile
encounter  with a big fellow had more to lose if cowed and more to gain if
defiant. As the number of South Carolina’s representatives dwindled with each
late antebellum census, declining from eight in 1830 to six in 1860, the little
guy got littler and littler but the size of his honor expanded  to compensate,
or perhaps overcompensate.  Since political virtue and  personal honor were at
stake, the alumni who went to Washington  cultivated the image of not being
afraid of anything or anybody. Like  Sims, the alumni of the College
collectively decided to “help  themselves”. As one South Carolinian critic of
secession noted, “The  most prominent in this secessionist movement have been
young men,  inspired with notions of personal honor to be defended and
individual  glory to be acquired. They seem to think that a state or a whole
people  are to be governed by the same punctilious code of honor that would have
influenced a hot chevalier in the days of knight errantry.”  In the  minds of
South Carolina College alumni, the American Civil War was a  duel writ large
over a broken contract.

Personal honor was a  microscopic version of national virtue; both were kinds of
independence  defined in contrast to slavery and both were realized in honorable
combat. A duel was a microscopic rebellion in which two gentlemen  re-entered a
ritualized state of nature for a three count announced by  their seconds. The
duel and the rebellion were equally natural, manly  and inevitable: the justice
of one entailed the justice of the other.  For many alumni the Civil War was
duel writ large in which two nations  could re-enter the state of nature and
settle conflict with ritual  violence. Benjamin Perry was one of the more
prudent South Carolinians  who noted with alarm the equation of civil war with
the duel. He warned  “Fellow citizens, the honor of the patriot and the
statesmen is not the  honor of the duelist…the duelist may go and sacrifice his
own life and  society is but little injured by it, not so with those who stir up
revolutions and civil wars.”

The analogy between the sectional  conflict and the duel worked in reverse as
well. The author who codified the rules for dueling was both a minister and a
former Governor of the  South Carolina, John Lyde Wilson. The second edition of
the Code of  Honor, published in 1858, justified the practice of dueling, (which
was  usually deplored by Christian believers, much less ministers) by analogy to
a war for national liberation and the natural right of rebellion:

…if the question be directly put to me, whether there are not cases where  duels
are right and proper, I would unhesitatingly answer, there are. If an oppressed
nation has the right to appeal to arms in defense of its  liberty and the
happiness of its people, there can be no argument used  in support of such
appeal, which will not apply with equal force to  individuals.

It has sometimes been asked why the advocates of  Southern nationalism were
willing to undertake a war against a far  larger and better-equipped opponent.
For those alumni like Wigfall (‘37) and Keitt (‘43) who were at the vanguard of
proslavery secessionist  politics, the ethos of honor paradoxically made a war
with a numerically superior North attractive, not in spite of the North’s size,
but  because of the North’s size. An honorable little fellow would resent a  big
cowardly scoundrel treading upon his toes, and if the scoundrel got a richly
merited chastisement so much the better. Such a war had a  macabre attraction
for some hotheaded alumni apart from any  miscalculations of the odds of
success. Alternatively, if the North  backed down after being threatened and the
South could gain independence and secure slavery bloodlessly, honor would still
be preserved and the  cowardly Yankees would be shamed before the world. Thus
the roaring and  the bragging about Southern military prowess and Northern
effeminacy was simultaneously unrealistic and shrewd. During the controversy
surrounding Nullification, the South Carolinian gentry who attended the
Convention responded to an insult, the protective tariff, with a defiant note.
The Ordnance of Nullification, drafted by William Harper (’08),  was in many
ways analogous to a challenge to duel over the tariff. In  Congressman Miller’s
(‘08) personification: the big fellow must stand  off the toes of the little
fellow. President Jackson, a former general  who was a native of South Carolina
and also an expert duelist, was much  inclined to accept this challenge writ
large, but cooler heads prevailed and the conflict was averted through the
intercession of friends on  both sides. The compromise was tenuous and the
alumni in Washington were anxious to achieve a more satisfactory settlement.

The South  Carolina Congressional delegation, which during and after
nullification  always had a substantial proportion of alumni, kept up a barrage
of  bluster and threats often couched in the language of the duel.  Congressman
James Henry Hammond was told in 1835 by some of his  constituents, “Compel them
to toe the mark or abandon the ground…We can  successfully vindicate our
institutions in the forum and in the field.  Your friends all say “Well done”,
Dr. Cooper, all the Addams’ and  Addison… Hampton too.”  A duelist who failed to
“toe the mark” was a  coward so fearful of being killed that he forfeited his
honor by  abandoning the dueling “ground” in disgrace. Such a coward would be
posted and thus demoted from the class of gentlemen. The pariah would  suffer
social death.

​	A threatening intransigence came easily to  the alumni who entered
national political controversies. They sought to  secure slavery permanently and
failing that to provoke a sectional  crisis and war: either an honorable
accommodation or a duel. Between  1800 and 1860 the inhabitants of the “Yankee”
nation spoke the moral  language of the College alumni less and less. Alumni
they believed that  Northern politicians imposed avaricious and dishonest
constructions upon the Constitution; few Northerners dueled, none were as
focused upon  honor. College alumni, whose moral imagination was, estranged form
the  main trends in nineteenth century moral and political discourse found
other views, particularly those of partisan politicians, disturbingly  corrupt.
During the wrangling over the Compromise of 1850, Congressman  McWillie (’17) of
Mississippi seemed both exasperated and offended when  he inquired of the North
“Gentlemen, can it be that you who profess such high conscientiousness and moral
sense, have no honor?”

​	Taunts and accusations of impropriety were magnified in importance in
South  Carolina because in the absence of organized political parties,
reputation among the local squires was the sine qua non of political  advance.
Dishonor had to be promptly and publicly resented by an appeal  to the Code and
words had deadly consequences. Honor was the touchstone  of political legitimacy
and moral virtue. As an alumnus in Alabama wrote James Henry Hammond (‘25),
“…politics is no calling for a gentleman  now a days- you do things with some
decency in Carolina, but in  Washington and everywhere else it is all filth.”
As it became clear to  the alumni that the North and its

representatives were  increasingly hostile to slavery they interpreted this
change as moral  corruption which was abetted by factious political parties. The
moral  decline of the nation was, for the alumni, personified in the Yankee
Congressmen who scorned the Code and the political outlook to which it  was an
accessory. They were not gentlemen. As William Grayson (‘09)  wrote in 1853, a
gentleman “…never, therefore indulges in that sweeping  and indiscriminate
abuse, so common with party, which represents its  opponents as corrupt,
knavish, and capable of every villainy. He leaves  such coarse denunciations to
tap-rooms, stump orators and members of  Congress.”  In South Carolina, such
words would quickly get the speaker  killed.

Alumni in Congress were particularly astonished by the  ungentlemanly language
used by Northerners without fear or shame. As  Grayson (‘09) noted,

…[T]he active politicians of Congress cannot, therefore be gentlemen.  ...[I]t
is not at all inconsistent with their  claims…that they should be liars,
cowards, and scoundrels. At least we  have their own assurance that they are, as
nothing is more common than  their application of these and similar terms to one
another. Their  general proceedings, too, appear, to a casual observer, ignorant
of the  genius of our democratic institutions, to be singularly at variance with
dignity, decorum or even decency.

The erosion of what alumni  took to be even minimal standards of decency in
national politics  demanded a ritual of purgation to stave off the corruption
which was  making disunion necessary. Preston Brooks’ (‘39) 1856 caning of
Senator  Sumner was a ceremonial pantomime of the impending Civil War; a ritual
of defiance reflecting the outcome of the larger conflict as it was  anticipated
by Brooks’ family, social circle, constituents and state. It was a case of a
determined and honorable little fellow besting a bigger but cowardly offender;
the fire-eating alumni hoped that this would be  the Civil War in miniature.
Brooks stated in his defense, just before  leaving the House of Representatives
for South Carolina, that it was a  matter of personal honor.

Whatever insults my State insults me.  Her history and character have commanded
my pious veneration; and in her defense I hope I shall always be prepared,
humbly and modestly, to  perform my duty of a son. I should have forfeited my
own self-respect,  and perhaps the good opinion of my countrymen, if I had
failed to resent such an injury by calling the offender to personal account.

Any  honorable man would recognize the obligation to defend his mother. Had
Sumner been an honorable man Brooks would have challenged him. “The  question
has been asked in certain newspapers, why I did not invite the  Senator to
personal combat in the mode usually adopted… My answer is  that I knew that the
Senator would not accept a message…”.  When a  Northerner Congressmen proved to
be both ignorant regarding matters of  honor and sufficiently dishonest to claim
that Brooks had attempted to  murder Sumner with a “bludgeon”, Brooks vehemently
insisted that he had  attacked Sumner with the appropriate ceremonial
instrument: a cane. On  the floor of Congress he asked Congressman DeWitt of
Massachusetts, who  had accused him, to hold up his cane which was twice the
weight of the  “light” weapon he used. Brooks said “Now, sir, I ask you as a
gentleman- I beg his pardon, that is a word he cannot comprehend- but as a man
on  the witness stand, is not that cane double the weight and thickness of  the
one used by me, and which you have impudently and falsely called a  bludgeon?…”
In Brooks opinion, impudent and mendacious  Northern  politicians no longer
understood the word “gentleman” and the loss of  personal honor entailed loss of
national virtue.

The alumni  identified themselves punctiliously with culturally specific forms
of  honor and virtue. When Brooks (’39) found Senator Sumner at his desk on  the
Senate floor, he waited anxiously for over an hour for all the  ladies to leave
the hall, because he did not wish to offer them insult  by violently chastising
Sumner in their presence. After observing the  proprieties, the honorable little
fellow methodically set to work  beating the cowardly big fellow like a slave.
He stated with perfect  honesty that he intended to disgrace and dishonor
Sumner, not to kill  him, as was evident in his choice of weapons. As he stated
“If I desired to kill the Senator, why did I not do it? … Let me tell the member
from New Jersey that it was expressly to avoid taking life that I used an
ordinary cane… I went to work very deliberately, as I am charged- and  this is
admitted- and speculated somewhat as to whether I should employ a horsewhip or
cowhide…”.

Brooks (’39), who habitually walked  with a cane because he had been lamed
sixteen years earlier in a duel  with Louis Wigfall (‘37), eschewed the cowhide
and horsewhip because, as he explained, he was smaller and weaker than Sumner.
He had worried  that Sumner might wrest a horsewhip or cowhide from him and
attack his  person. This indignity would have made it necessary to kill Sumner
on  the spot, and Brooks avowed he would have regretted such a necessity.
Brooks remained unrepentant and as he closed his speech he threatened to use the
cane again in retaliation for the use of the word “villain” by  another
Congressman:

I saw in the New York papers that a certain  feminine gentleman from that State
had applied to me the term “villain”… I only allude to it to advertise the
indignant gentleman that I have  seen the word and know it was spoken in New
York, and not here in  debate. He need not be much alarmed; and if he will “hold
still” when I  get hold of him I’ll not hurt him much…

A gentleman who would not fight forfeited masculinity as swell as honor. Brooks
(’39) wished to  duel with the last of the “fighting men” of the North, if any
such  existed, and their reluctance for personal encounter was taken as
evidence of the moral weakness and effeminacy of a corrupt society. When
Congressman Woodruff of Connecticut made a vigorous speech denouncing  the
caning of Sumner, Brooks made a deep bow as a gesture of respect. He expanded
upon that gesture by immediately asking a friend to inquire of the gentleman
from Connecticut if he was what he appeared to be, an  honorable Northern
duelist. “Colonel Brooks and his friends, myself  among the number, understood
you, in your speech, to hold yourself out  as a fighting man, subject to the law
of honor; and I am requested to  present to you Colonel Brooks’ compliments, and
inquire whether you are  willing to receive a communication from him under the
rules of that  code.”  Congressman Woodruff declined, which was to be expected
from  posturing hypocritical liars. Many College alumni concluded that a  nation
represented by such men was effete and feeble and demoralized;  honor and
martial virtue were things of the past in the North.  Brooks  called Congressman
Comins of Massachusetts a “poltroon and puppy”, (an  utterance recognized as
grounds for a duel in the Palmetto state)  because Comins had dared to criticize
Brooks without a willingness to  resort to weapons honorably and openly. “I say
to that gentleman that no man has the right to wear arms that does not dare to
use them. In my  country, the cock that crows and won’t fight is despised by the
hens...”.  Brooks (’39) was a fighting gamecock.

​	Brooks and his  accomplice Lawrence M. Keitt (‘43) were expelled from
Congress and were  then immediately reelected without opposition. Keitt (’43),
who  brandished a cane at those who tried to intervene and protect Sumner,
justified Brooks’ actions thus:

Sir, had my colleague acted  otherwise than he did, he would have deserved
contempt. There are  wrongs, sir, for the redress of which no appeal can be made
to a human  tribunal. Wounded honor can never be redressed by an attorney; nor
can a manly pride be weighed in legal scales. My colleague redressed a wrong  to
his blood and his State, and he did it in a fair and manly way. Sir,  the feudal
code of chivalry- the only code of chivalry the wit of man  has ever
constructed- the churl was never touched with the knightly  sword; his person
was mulcted by the quarter-staff.

The  chivalrous propensity toward violence alluded to by Keitt could erupt at
any time, and in the presence of such vulgar scoundrels violence might  easily
degenerate into a breach of etiquette. As Keitt noted “Everybody  here feels as
if we are on a volcano. I am glad for it, for I am tired  of stagnation.”

Keitt (’43) erupted, or rather misfired, in  1858. His inclination toward
violence spilled over the bounds of  gentlemanly behavior during the late night
wrangling on the floor of the House over bleeding Kansas. Keitt provoked a
fistfight with a  Republican Congressman Grow from Pennsylvania. Keitt had
objected to  Grow’s presence on his side of the Hall.  Grow retorted; Keitt
replied  “I’ll show you, you damned black Republican puppy!” to which Grow
responded “You may think of me what you please Mr. Keitt; but let me  tell you
that no nigger driver shall come up from his plantation to  crack his lash about
my ears!” Keitt jumped up and said “We’ll see about that” as he grabbed Grow by
the throat. At least six other Congressmen  joined in the melee which
spontaneously developed along sectional lines. The fracas ended, not with pseudo
feudal posturing and the use of a  quarterstaff but with a wild swing and a miss
which Congressman Washburn of Wisconsin directed toward the jaw of Congressman
Barksdale of  Mississippi. Washburn had attempted to grab Barksdale’s hair so as
to  deliver a “sucker punch”; unfortunately Washburn unintentionally tore  off
Barksdale’s toupee and consequently missed badly with his punch,  leaving
Barksdale scuttling around the floor in search of his fugitive  hairpiece. This
ignoble turn of events reduced the entire House to  laughter and the brawl ended
in levity, which was not at all to Keitt’s  humor.  If Brooks’ encounter with
Sumner represented the hopes of  radical alumni for the outcome of the Civil
War, the sectional fistfight between Keitt and Grow and Barksdale and the rest
symbolized the fears  of the more prudent alumni that the Civil War would expose
a ludicrous  weakness – shallow vanity and impotent rage, and that their leading
men  would be shamed before the world as low comedians.

The esprit  d’corps of the alumni allowed them to vouch for one another as
honorable gentlemen.  John B. Floyd (’29) was Secretary of War under President
Buchanan (1856-1860). His political prognostications may be inferred  from the
fact that just before the war he ordered 115,000 muskets and  rifles removed to
federal armories in North Carolina, South Carolina,  Georgia, Alabama, and
Louisiana.  He wrote to Governor Pickens of South  Carolina a month before they
seceded that the new “Instructions for  field artillery ready can be handed over
to any representative of state”  Governor Pickens (‘27) and Secretary Floyd
(’29) had been in College  together. On December 20, 1860, the day South
Carolina seceded, Floyd  ordered heavy artillery removed from Pittsburgh and
taken South.  Louis  Wigfall (‘37) defended Floyd against his critics in the
Senate. Sparring with Senator Fessenden, Wigfall appealed again to the Code. He
jabbed  ,“If the Senator wants to make a point of honor on him or charge him
with indirection; the Secretary of War and the Senator can settle it.  The
Secretary of War was born in Virginia, and I believe is a gentleman; at least
there is the presumption in his favor….  Wigfall might have  mentioned that the
Secretary, who had advocated disunion ten years  earlier as Governor of
Virginia, was also an alumnus of South Carolina  College, which was also a
presumption in his favor.

​	In 1860,  surveying the chasm that developed between the sections and
their  representatives, Louis Wigfall noted grimly, “The players have reached
the point when it has to be a tragedy or a farce.”  From his  perspective,
Wigfall (’37) was perhaps elevating the degrading tone of  the sectional
conflict above the ranks of the farcical by invoking, once again, the rhetoric
of honor and the solemn symbolism of the duel:

When some of the States that are not robbed choose not to submit longer to  be
confederated with States that are faithless, they are answered by  saying “Why
do you not wait till the states that are robbed shall  resist?” Why sir, if I
and a friend happen to be passing along  Pennsylvania avenue, and are both
slapped in the face, and in addition  to the indignity, the purse of my friend
is also taken from him, does  his submission devolve upon me any duty also to
submit? Because robbery  has not been added to insult and perjury and perfidy,
South Carolina and Georgia and Florida and Alabama and Mississippi and Texas and
Arkansas  are not to complain! This sort of logic we do not understand in that
section of the country. Our misapprehension, doubtless is a result of  the
“barbarism of slavery”. In that country there are men who, even in  this
utilitarian age, are not dead to all sentiment; who defend with the hazard of
their lives and with their blood their personal honor; and  will be as ready to
defend the honor of their States as they are their  individual respectability.

​	The ethos of honor carried the alumni into and through the Civil War.
The combat as duel idea surfaced  incongruously among alumni during the all too
real dangers of the war  itself. One astonishing story involving General Wade
Hampton (’36)  epitomizes the connections made by alumni between the Civil War
and the  duel.

…At approximately 125 yards distance, he saw the sniper…  As Hampton first saw
him, the youngster was most unmilitarily standing  in full view on a stump
behind which he should have been hiding, and was lifting his piece for another
try. Hampton whipped his revolver from  its holster and the two shots rang out
almost as one. Pearson missed  again, while Hampton, the peerless marksman,
struck a bit of bark off  the stump with his own ball. A second exchange and
Hampton felt the  boy’s bullet rip his cavalry cape… Now Pearson had trouble
with his  powder fouled weapon and lifted one hand naively, as though to signal
a  momentary truce. Hampton, obeying an impulse that must have stemmed  straight
from Sir Walter Scott, elevated his revolver muzzle like a  formal duelist and
politely awaited his adversary’s convenience. The  Michigander produced a
ramrod, carefully swabbed the bore of his carbine and loaded afresh. A third
brace of shots rang out. …His bullet struck  and shattered Pearson’s wrist.

Difficult as this story is to  believe, it was attested to after the war by
Private Pearson, the young  Federal soldier whose wrist was shot. If an
antagonist had sufficient  coursge to needlessly expose his whole body to enemy
fire, Hampton was  reflexively willing to show such a gentleman the respect that
his  “thymos” merited. Little Wade, slayer of ducks, was educated to be an
honorable gentleman, and he grew up to be General Hampton (’36), warrior and
duelist. For General Hampton, as for many alumni, the war was an  affair of
honor.

​	The importance of honor for Hampton and the  other alumni is hard to
overstate. His perspective was revealed in  reminiscences after the war. When he
was asked, how many “Federals he  had killed”, “Eleven.” replied Hampton, “Two
with my sword and nine with my pistol.”  “This seemed too small a number to
Brooks, who thought he  remembered more, even though he had served under Hampton
only during the last year of the war.  He reflected a moment, mentally counting,
“How  about the two at Trevilian?” he asked, remembering the charge that saved
Hart’s guns. “Oh” said Hampton, “I did not count them, they were  running.””
Only combat with an honorable enemy, with equals, free  white men who fought
back, was worth mentioning, because only such  antagonists were worthy. They
died honorably and their deaths conferred  honor. For Hampton it was an act of
another ontological status to shoot  in the back a cowardly dog fleeing
dishonorably from combat. It didn’t  make the cowards any less dead, but it was
a different kind of thing.  There was no honor in killing such vermin for a real
soldier. It was not to be comparable to honorable victory over real Federals who
stood  their ground and fought like men. For alumni of the College, the
dishonored counted for nothing.

Unfortunately, the Janus faced  honor of the alumni was a stimulus to courage
but also to racial  malevolence during the war. It seems that some of the units
in which the alumni served had a reputation on both sides for offering no
quarter to black troops or to their white commanders. In his Civil War memoirs,
John Haskell (’61) noted,  “Found a colonel of a negro regiment dead  without
any insignia of rank.” It seems to have been common knowledge  that “They had
learned that our men did not readily give quarter to  officers of negro
regiments and preferred when caught to pass as  privates of white regiments.”
The slaves who claimed the honor of  fighting for freedom particularly
threatened their antagonists.

Our men, who were always made wild by negroes being sent against them …were
utterly frenzied with rage. Nothing in war could have exceeded the  horrors that
followed, no quarter given for what seemed a long time  fearful butchery was
carried on. There was little firing, the men being  too crowded, but they
stabbed with their bayonets, and clubbed with  their muskets until utterly
exhausted, fresh ones coming in at every  moment. Some of the white men were
spared but very few negroes.

The habit of mercilessly exterminating black Union troops and their white
officers after their surrender seems to have been well publicized and it
prompted disgraceful behavior by everyone involved. One captured white  officer
without insignia of rank, apparently fearing summary execution,  picked up a
musket “and shouting out that he would kill the damned  niggers had dashed out
the brains of a colored soldier.” One of the few  black soldiers still alive
identified him as a captain of his regiment  and he was summarily executed.  The
ethos of honor made alumni capable  of exceptional valor but also ferocious
cruelty toward those without  honor.

​	Professor Francis Lieber was painfully accurate in his  predictions
regarding the coming Civil War; "... a war between the North and the South would
be one of the bitterest ever recorded, and  degenerate perhaps into one of the
most honorless and meanest, void of  faith and chivalry which is wont to hover
over our modern wars as the  remnant star of humanity."  The ethos of the
College in which only  honorable antagonists counted meant that antagonists who
were  dishonored, or beneath equality with honorable gentlemen, were regarded
as having little or no value. Prominent alumni were implicated in the
mistreatment of the dishonored, Southern Yankee sympathizers, black  Union
troops, and their white officers. The valedictorian of the class  of 1851, James
Chalmers, was a member of the Mississippi secession  convention who served as a
Confederate Colonel. He was eventually  referred to as “Fort Pillow Chalmers”.
In 1864 after the surrender at  Fort Pillow Tennessee there was a massacre of
mixed black and white  Union troops.  It does seem that troops under Chalmers
command did use  rifles and bayonets on captured union prisoners, black and
white.  Chalmers vigorously denied the charges, as did all other officers at
Fort Pillow such as Nathan Bedford Forrest, but most historians who have
examined the evidence have concluded that a massacre did indeed take  place.  It
is testimony to the postwar importance of the alumni that  Chalmers (’51) most
vehement denials came after Reconstruction, while he was in Washington serving
as a Congressman from Mississippi.
