---
src: https://michaelsugrue.substack.com/p/a-book-i-never-published-e3c
---

Chapter Seven

The Ancien Regime Redux: 1865 – 1890

In those days there was no king in Israel; everyone did what was right in his
own eyes.

Judges 21:25

​	During the controversy over nullification, Charleston lawyer James
Louis Petigru (’09) wrote with grim accuracy, “The men who have created  the
uproar are profiting by it. They are enjoying the gratification of  their
vanity. They are playing the part of great men and swelling with  the inward
sense of their own importance. And they would rather perish  and cause all
humanity to perish with them than resign the hold which  they now have on the
folly of the people.”  Petigru’s observation that  the members of South
Carolina’s elite were willing to hazard their  existence to maintain their self
esteem was prophetic. At the end of the war, almost twenty percent of the adult
white male population of the  state had been killed.  Those alumni who survived
were slaveless masters inhabiting a landscape of utter devastation, a
geographical monument to their excessive “thymos”. Desperate to shirk
responsibility for the  destruction they saw all around them, in the wake of the
calamity they  had labored so diligently to achieve the alumni set to work
eulogizing  themselves and legitimizing their self destructive vanity. They
idealized the College and the elite it spawned as a means of reviving  their
former political dominance under adverse postwar circumstances.  Resentment over
the abolition of slavery and the bitterness of military  defeat combined with a
thirst for renewed political power to create  among the alumni an irresistible
nostalgia for an imaginary antebellum  golden age.

Just as the war ended in 1865, former U.S.  Congressman and Confederate Colonel
Henry Hilliard (’26) published De  Vane: A Story of Plebians and Patricians, one
of the few novels to be  written by an alumnus of the College.  Justifiably
forgotten on the  basis of its literary merits, this exercise in collective
hagiography,  set in Columbia around South Carolina College during the late
1820s, is  Hilliard’s apologia for South Carolina’s ancien regime. This timely
exercise in literary mythmaking recapitulates the social life and  political
concerns of the College in the age of Cooper, valorizing this  peculiar elite
and insisting that they not be excluded from the national history. As one of the
most favorably drawn characters says, “I am  intensely American.”

​	The plot of DeVane, as the subtitle  suggests, revolves around the
fusion of seaboard patricians and  upcountry plebeians under the aegis of the
College to create an organic  Southern elite. George DeVane, scion of a wealthy
tidewater Virginia  family, and John Waring, a poor orphan from Georgia who had
the unusual  good fortune to get a

higher education, are members of the same  class in South Carolina College and
become lifetime friends. They  simultaneously court and eventually marry two
cultivated young ladies,  one poor, one rich, from the social set surrounding
the College.  DeVane’s impecunious but virtuous belle is made financially secure
by  her happy marriage, and Waring is made independently wealthy and equally
happy in his marriage to a lovely heiress. Neither marriage is  morganatic; both
are motivated by romantic love. Both young men  distinguish themselves in their
studies, (Waring is valedictorian of his class), and after graduation DeVane
devotes himself to politics and  Waring becomes a professor at the College. The
symbolic unification of  disparate Southern social strata in the circles
surrounding the College  is emphasized throughout more than five hundred pages,
and ends with  DeVane saying to his new wife, “our blended being is an immortal
union.  From henceforth thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God.”

​	The importance of the College in the political culture of the state was
repeatedly acknowledged in DeVane, and Hilliard (’26), despite the fact that his
book was published  after the war, maintained a fierce loyalty to the
institution:

The College shed about it an intellectual  influence that was very marked, while
the highest courts in the state  being held there and the annual assembling of
the Legislature, made it a place of far greater interest and importance than its
numerical  population or its commercial activity would have conferred on it, if
it  had been dependent upon these alone. Long may the College prosper! Long  may
it be the seat of a government distinguished for intelligence,  statesmanship
and dignity.

Hilliard presented the elite society  connected to the College in a very
favorable light: “Cultivated people  abound here; the society is remarkable for
its refinement; and every  winter brings us the first men of the State, who come
here either as  members of the Legislature, or to attend its session.”  At his
most  congratulatory, he allowed his characters to express superiority to  their
classical models “We revel in luxuries this evening. Poetry, the  arts, fruits,
flowers, ices. The ancients never equaled us with all  their boasted
civilization.”  The only defect that Hilliard acknowledged in antebellum South
Carolinian society was that “…the avenues to  distinction are too few. Politics
is almost the only pursuit for our men and our women have none.”

​	Despite the self congratulatory  idealizing, Hilliard’s novel often does
accurately represent the  political controversies in which the College was
entangled and the  elitist view of education which the College realized. In his
graduation  honors speech, George DeVane speaks on the theme of classical
learning,  but could not resist an excursion into the politics of higher
education. As Hilliard describes the oration “The value of common schools was
not  underrated, but it was insisted that an exalted training of even a few
minds did more toward advancing the progress of our race than the widest
diffusion of the mere elements of knowledge.”  The adversarial  relationship
between the advocates of the College and the advocates of  the common schools
was taken for granted by Hilliard, and there is no  ambiguity about his support
for the Collegiate elite. The influence  which the alumni exerted in obtaining
funds at the expense of public  primary and secondary schools was also endorsed
by Hilliard.

“I hope,” she said, “that the Legislature will be generous.”

“You must help us with them.” said Waring. “Exert your influence and secure for
us a large appropriation.”

“If I can do anything you may count upon me.” She replied.

“I am very sure that you can do much. One of the leading members is, I am  sorry
to say, earnestly opposed to classical learning and thinks nothing can save the
country but common-schools.”

“Ah! We must put all our strength against him, and urge Mr. DeVane to activity
when he returns.”

“Yes” said Waring, and Mr. LeGrande is a member of the House, whose splendid
scholarship will be of immense importance to us, himself at once an  advocate
for classical learning, and a noble illustration of the  advantages which it
confers. A graduate, too, of our College.”

​	 DeVane is a particularly revealing work because Hilliard’s novel is
mostly populated by real historical figures with their names changed and small
adjustments to their chronology or character. The superbly  intellectual Senator
Caldwell has the same commanding presence and  middle name as John C. Calhoun.
DeVane, the aristocratic Virginian, is  probably based upon John B. Floyd (’29),
who eventually served as  Buchanan’s Secretary of War. Waring, the plebian
valedictorian and  zealous preacher who becomes professor of “Evidences of
Christianity” in the College, is based upon James Henly Thornwell (’31). The
eloquent  Mr. Clarendon is William Campbell Preston (‘12), and the skeptical
Professor Dahlgreen is Professor Nott (’14). Dr. Hume, the aged and  rotund
president of the College who advocates free speech and radical  politics, is
described as just having completed a book on political  economy. The
characterization of Dr. Hume is telling: ““He seems to be  deeply interested in
politics”, said Mr. Springfield, “and he is  intensely of the states rights
school of thinkers.” “Yes”, said Waring,  “he at times utters some startling
opinions, which may yet be as  formidable as dragon’s teeth, and, if wide
spread, will yield great  armies.””  Dr. Hume is, of course, Thomas Cooper, and
the author of  DeVane, Col. Henry Hilliard (’26), was one of the Confederate
soldiers  who sprang from the dragon’s teeth he sowed.

Hilliard’s  idealization of the College and the elite it formed omits the
drinking,  the whoring, and the rowdiness of student rebellions. There is no
violence, no dueling, and most importantly, there are no ill-treated or  unhappy
slaves. In most of the novel, slaves are merely a mute backdrop  to elegant
drawing room repartee. Old Uncle Jacob, the only slave who  speaks, makes a very
good impression on DeVane and Waring. ““That old  negro,” said DeVane, “is
thoroughly well bred. … His language is good,  and he seems to be as humble as
if he had never been indulged.”” Waring  replies ““Yes, he loves his young
mistress-thinks himself happy to be  permitted to serve her; and he is a
Christian.””  Old Uncle Jacob is the literary personification of the postbellum
wishful thinking of South  Carolina’s former slaveholders. Still rejecting
abolitionist criticism  in 1865, the alumni of the College continued to produce
proslavery  propaganda even after slavery had been forcibly abolished.

In  Alabama, the scientific racist, Dr. Josiah Nott (’24) continued the  defense
of slavery with his 1866 book, The Negro Race: Its Ethnology and History. He
stated that emancipation was a catastrophe for blacks and  predicted that the
former slaves were doomed to extinction because “…a  superior and an inferior
race cannot live together practically on any  other terms than that of master
and slave….  South Carolina’s newly  emancipated black people were very
reluctant to die out, however, and  their former masters had to make contingency
plans in case they did not  become extinct. Since former slaves composed nearly
three fifths of  South Carolina’s total postwar population, they posed a
daunting  challenge to the Collegiate elite. How could men who had spent whole
lifetimes insisting that slavery was essential to political rectitude  now
direct a society composed mainly of former slaves without appearing  overtly
opportunistic and pathetically dishonest? How could gentlemen  who had
previously enslaved more than half the population and led the  remainder into
the suicidal folly of Civil War now claim in the  aftermath that they were the
proper leaders of society? How could they  rejoin the United States without such
innovations such as popular  government, free and fair democratic elections, and
equal rights for its citizens, which would sound the death knell for the ancien
regime?

The answer developed by the elite of the Palmetto state was terror. Slavery was
abolished but the war was not over, the war for white South  Carolinian national
liberation simply entered a new phase. The process  of decolonization was a
bitter, violent and radical movement for racial  unity among native whites. As
one author has observed “[d]ecolonization  unifies the people by the radical
decision to remove from it its  heterogeneity, and by unifying it on a national,
sometimes a racial  basis.”  The alumni of the College were conspicuous among
the leaders of a low level guerilla war against the army of the United States,
the  black majority of the state population, Northern carpetbaggers, and the
handful of scalawags who cooperated with the Republican regime.  This  infamous
war of attrition took the form of terroristic violence  sponsored first by the
Ku Klux Klan and later by paramilitary gun clubs, both of which were led and
organized by College alumni. In 1876, at the end of the war, the “Bourbons” of
the ancien regime emerged battered  but victorious. Southern nationalism was
transformed into “Home Rule”  and slight modifications to proslavery arguments
provided a cover of  legitimacy for the Jim Crow racism of “Redemption”.

In 1865, F.  W. Pickens, (’27) who had been the secession Governor of South
Carolina, warned the first postwar Governor, B.F. Perry, not to underestimate
the determination of “men taking the ground that slavery was not &  could not be
abolished and swearing that they would never submit to it  &ct,”.  His advice
was prescient. Most of the alumni who survived  the war did their best to resist
Reconstruction and reconstitute the  ancien regime.  Although the College alumni
suffered substantial losses  on the battlefield during the Civil War, and those
that survived the war often returned home maimed and impoverished, they were
still a  politically potent, intellectually sophisticated and socially cohesive
group. Reconstruction was an agonizing period of discontinuity, and the
resistance to Reconstruction, which was protracted, bitter and unusually violent
in South Carolina, was largely led by remnants of this  antebellum elite.

A few men such as Franklin J. Moses (’55), John T. Green (’46) and Thomas J.
Robertson (’43), became Republican  scalawags and occupied high office, but such
pariahs were conspicuously  rare. The Bourbon leaders who resisted
Reconstruction and “redeemed” the state after 1876 shared many elements of
continuity with South  Carolina’s antebellum political leaders; they generally
had served in  the Confederate army, they shared a common set of formative
educational  experiences at South Carolina College. Their political thinking
contained many common assumptions.   One common assumption was that  after Lee’s
surrender the outcome of the Civil War was still in doubt.  Most of the alumni
supported the low intensity war of racist terror  until they regained political
power in 1876 under the leadership of  Confederate General turned Governor, Wade
Hampton (’36). Hampton  continued to fight the second phase of the Civil War
until he led his  red shirted troops to victory eleven years after Lee’s
surrender. He  stated “I will not give up. I will fight on every battlefield
shown by  the enemy till I fall or we are free….”  He said this two years after
Appomattox. One northern magazine described Hampton (’36) with telling  accuracy
as “…neither a statesman nor a politician, nor a man of  conciliatory
disposition, nor anything but a soldier and a Southern  gentleman of the Old
School, to who (sic) niggers, Yankees, schools,  roads, free labor, and free
speech are naturally almost as hateful as  the Pope himself.”  After their
victory in 1876, Hampton (’36) and his  fellow alumni of the antebellum College
dominated state politics until  the election of “Pitchfork” Ben Tillman in 1890.

​	The alumni of  the College were for the most part unreconstructible, as
they were  unwilling to amend the expectations, beliefs and attitudes they had
cherished for a lifetime. At the end of the war they were unwilling to  accept
emancipation and strove to revive slavery defacto if not dejure.  In 1865,
Edmund Rhett (’52) wrote that the former slaves new condition  should be
“…limited, controlled and surrounded by such safeguards as  will make the change
as slight as possible… he should be kept as near to his former condition as the
law can keep him…he should be kept as near  to the condition of slavery as
possible and as far from the condition of the white man as practicable.”

​	Encouraged by President  Johnson’s leniency, on September 13, 1865, a
convention composed  overwhelmingly of former Confederates met to create a
provisional  constitution for South Carolina which would minimally meet the
demands  of the North while retaining the political status quo ante bellum to
the greatest extent possible. The President of the convention, Judge David
Wardlaw (‘16), had been a member of the secession convention, and more  than one
third of the delegates were alumni. The elite remained defiant, as they had
after the conflict with President Jackson over  nullification. Instead of
declaring secession “null and void” as  President Johnson had required, they
pointedly voted to repeal it. The  President’s demand that the Confederate debt
be repudiated was not even  discussed.  The abolition of slavery was recognized,
suffrage was  restricted to white males, and the legislature was reapportioned.
The  state was divided into four congressional districts and new elections  were
scheduled for October. Most importantly, the convention resolved  that a legal
code exclusively applicable to the newly freed slaves be  written.

Approximately one third of the state legislators elected in October 1865 during
the first evanescent revival of the ancien  regime were alumni, roughly the same
proportion as the antebellum era.  General Wade Hampton (’36) steadfastly
refused to be a candidate for  Governor and asked his friends not to vote for
him, but he came within a few hundred votes of winning nonetheless. One of the
two Senators, John L. Manning (’37), and all four of the newly elected
Congressmen, John  D. Kennedy (’57), William Aiken (’25), Samuel McGowan (’41)
and James  Farrow (’47) were alumni. Because the city of Columbia was a ruin,
the  new legislature met, fittingly enough, on the grounds of the College.  The
Senate convened in the library, the lower house in the chapel.

​	South Carolina’s white minority did not wait for the November meeting
of the Legislature to subordinate the newly freed slaves. Without legal
authorization, the antebellum “patrol system” was restored and “scouts”  or
“regulators” were soon attempting to terrorize the freedpeople back  into quasi
slavery.  Officials of the Freedmans Bureau reported numerous abuses to
Washington. In late 1865, one planter offered three of his  former slaves a
lifetime contract to perform agricultural labor, when  they refused he drove
them off his land, then had a band of whites hunt  them down, killing the two
men and returning the woman to his  plantation.  Henry Ravenel (‘32) was one
planter who felt threatened by  the new assertiveness among the former slaves
who resisted de facto  reenslavement. He “found his freedom in and through
violence”  He was  pleased by what he described as the “…better and more orderly
spirit”  that prevailed among local blacks in his locality as a result of the
“presence of our Scouts & the summary execution of the ringleaders.” His recipe
for Reconstruction frankly endorsed terrorism and murder:  “…the conduct of our
Scouts should be no child’s play, no taking up and  whipping… [ringleaders]
should be quietly disposed of. The mystery of  disappearance has more awe in it
than any punishment which is seen or  known.”

​	The first major issue for the new legislature was racial subordination
of the black majority. South Carolina’s “Black Code” was a particularly onerous
set of laws that attempted to subordinate the  freedpeople, and recreate a close
approximation of slavery.  The new  Black Code gave “whiteness” and “blackness”
a legal definition. In the  antebellum period, a person’s race had been a matter
of fact for a jury  to decide; now it was made a matter of law. The three laws
comprising  1865 Black Code construed “blackness” as one-eighth Negro “blood”.
This  meant that most of Charleston’s large mixed race community was demoted  by
the binary distinction imposed by the Black Code, while others were  elevated to
the “Herrnvolk”. According to these new laws, “persons of  color”, were “not
entitled to social or political equality with white  persons.”  Blacks could not
be witnesses against whites in legal  proceedings. Racial intermarriage was made
illegal and blacks could not  own rifles or pistols and were prohibited from
distilling or selling  liquor. Their occupations were restricted to servant and
farmer; black  artisans were required pay a special annual tax of ten to one
hundred  dollars which was intended to be prohibitively expensive. The Black
Code defined persons of color who made contracts for service or labor as
“servants”, the antebellum euphemism for slave, those with whom they  contracted
were referred to as “masters”. Employers referred to as  “masters” could
“moderately correct”, (which was a euphemism for “beat”) those “servants” under
eighteen years old. David Wardlaw (’16) and  Armistead Burt, the antebellum
planters who drafted the Black Code of  1865, came as close as practically
possible to reestablishing slavery.

The hubris of South Carolina’s elite was undiminished by the outcome of the
Civil War and the tenacity of their arrogance was matched only by the  depth of
their self pity. Twenty-five years before secession,  Congressman James Henry
Hammond (’25) had defended South Carolina’s  political elite by insisting that
they: “Combin[ed] all the advantages,  and possess[ed] few of the disadvantages
of the aristocracy of the old  world”. He insisted that the elite in South
Carolina were superior to  European aristocrats because antebellum South
Carolinian political life  did not foster “to an unwarranted extent the pride,
the selfishness, the exclusiveness, the thirst for sway, the contempt for the
rights of  others, which distin¬guishes the nobility of Europe…".  Events after
the war proved each and every word of this to be a lie. Pride, selfishness,
exclusiveness, thirst for sway and contempt for the rights of others  were to a
grossly unwarranted extent the characteristic attributes of  the Bourbons. As
Napoleon said of the French royal family, they forgot  nothing and they learned
nothing. The Bourbons of the South Carolina  legislature who enacted the Black
Code also rejected the 14th Amendment  with only one dissenting vote.

South Carolina College was crucial to the postbellum survival of the ancien
regime, and the  unreconstructible Collegiate elite knew it. Even before the
first  postbellum legislature met, the Trustees of South Carolina College met
in emergency session to find a way to reopen the College.  The College  had
trained South Carolina’s antebellum elite and the reestablishment of the
institution was a high priority. As one Columbia newspaper stated,  “It will be
the first duty of our next legislature to re-establish the  South Carolina
College…”.  The legislature promptly reorganized the  College, and they signaled
their desire to return to the status quo ante bellum by placing R.W. Barnwell,
who had been president from 1835 to  1841and a Confederate Senator during the
War, in the presidency. Several men who had been professors at the college
during the antebellum period were also retained. Alexander C. Haskell (‘60), a
Bourbon who was  eventually appointed to the state Supreme Court, was named
professor of  law in 1867. Because the legislature proposed to add a faculty of
law  and medicine, the name of the institution was changed from South  Carolina
College to the University of South Carolina, but little else  changed. The
faculty and student body were exclusively white, the  classical curriculum was
largely retained, and the debate societies were revived. The students were
sympathetic to the Bourbon regime, and  scalawags Franklin J. Moses (’55) Thomas
J. Robertson (’43) were  expelled retroactively from Euphradian society 1868.
Although the  university adhered to the forms of the antebellum college as much
as  possible, few students whose education had been interrupted by the war
returned to complete their studies. Hardened by the war and embittered  by its
outcome, those who returned wanted power, not knowledge.

The intransigence of the Southern states in general and of South Carolina  in
particular antagonized Congress and paved the way for a more thorough and
punitive Reconstruction than President Johnson thought necessary.  The
Congressional elections of 1866 repudiated the virtual status quo  ante bellum
envisioned by the South Carolinian elite. The Reconstruction Acts passed over
President Johnson’s veto required full male suffrage, a new constitution and a
new election for the legislature. The alumni of  the College, temporarily
thwarted in their attempt to reestablish their  hegemony, opposed Congressional
reconstruction in a hysterical  collective outburst of self pity and rage.

 James Chestnut (’55)  was the president of a protest meeting of “conservative
 (white)  citizens” held on November 6, 1867 in Columbia. These gentlemen
 resolved that

The government of the country should not be permitted to  pass from the hands of
the white man to the negro. The enforcement of  the Reconstruction acts by
military power under the guise of negro  voters and negro conventions cannot
lawfully reestablish civil  government in South Carolina. It may for a time hold
us in subjection to a quasi-civil government backed by military force, but it
can do no  more. As citizens of the United States we should not consent to live
under negro supremacy nor should we acquiesce to negro equality.

J.M. Anderson (’41) described suffrage for freedmen “the ne plus ultra of  all
evils…Give the Negro political equality and he will legislate social equality.”
Wade Hampton (’36) attempted to rally white voters to  reject the new
constitution, insisting that the ratification of the 13th Amendment was the
source of their woes.  Former Congressman M. L.  Bonham (‘34) anticipated a “war
of the races” as a result of the  conflict over the new constitution.

Martin W. Gary (’52), who  had stated portentously that “South Carolinians never
surrender”, was  right; he later became the architect of the victorious white
supremacist regime in 1876. He railed against the proposed constitution,
insisting  that South Carolina should  “remain purely a White Man’s Government
and  that the negro shall not become a member of the body politic, or from  any
qualification either as to education or property, be allowed to  vote...”.
Alexander C. Haskell (’60), who was the university’s first  professor of law and
eventually rose to become the chairman of the South Carolina Democratic Central
Committee, roared defiance. “…[W]e will not permit the white race to be degraded
and trampled underfoot by the  negro.” He demanded “…the purification of the
Government, the overthrow  of the Reconstruction Acts of Congress as
unconstitutional, null and  void, and the restitution of the Constitution as it
was.”

​	The  Bourbons organized a campaign of intimidation and fraud but
nonetheless  decisively lost the election of 1867. The new state constitution of
1868 made South Carolina more democratic, with a small “d”, which created  novel
similarities to politics in the remainder of the United States.  The new
constitution provided for the suffrage of nonwhite males,  popular election of
Presidential electors, the popular election of the  Governor (who had veto power
over legislation) and reapportionment of  the legislature to reduce the
influence of rotten boroughs in the  lowcountry. The establishment of a school
system that was to be racially mixed was an alarming change. The fact that
racial intermarriage was  not criminalized was more alarming still. Mortified by
their failure to  defeat this usurpation of their prerogatives and threatened
with a  rising tide of political participation by their inferiors, the alumni of
South Carolina College were honor bound to prevent the looming loss of
political virtue. Shocked by the corruption of the Republican regime,  this
misunderstood and persecuted band of patriots validated the  chivalric legacy of
the “Lost Cause”. They helped restore political  morality by organizing the Ku
Klux Klan and conducting a statewide  campaign of intimidation and murder.

The shameless temerity of  the new Republican regime and the drastic changes
they imposed in the  wake of their electoral triumph alarmed and infuriated
South Carolina’s  antebellum elite.  Corporal punishment and imprisonment for
debt were  outlawed. A biracial school system with mandatory attendance was
subsidized by tax revenues. Heavy taxes were laid on uncultivated land  in order
to force the breakup of large plantations left over from the  antebellum era.
The South Carolina Land Commission, an institution  unique to South Carolina,
purchased real estate and sold it in small  homesteads on long term credit.
Almost one seventh of the black  population obtained farms in this
redistribution, but their gains were  ephemeral; by 1890, most landholding was
consolidated in the hands of a  few prominent white families.

These reforms threatened the old  elite with annihilation, and this was
acknowledged by all involved. The  expansion of public education was
particularly ominous. James Redpath,  Republican superintendent of schools in
reconstruction Charleston argued “This war [was] the result of the enslavement
of the poor blacks and  the ignorance of the poor whites. By educating everybody
we will take  care to prevent a war of the races, which the old ignoblesse would
bring about, if they dared and could, by prohibiting free schools and  repealing
the Holy proclamation.”  Control of South Carolina’s  educational system was
crucial to the development of political equality, and the Republicans eventually
wrested control of the University of  South Carolina from the Bourbons who had
revived it in 1865. After  gaining control of the state legislature, the new
regime continued  generous funding for the university. In the 1869 endowment act
the  Republican legislature provided that neither the faculty nor the Board  of
Trustees should “make any distinction in admission of students or the management
of the university on account of race, color or creed.”  The  university
continued as an all white institution for the next few years, but between 1873
and 1877, the “Radical” university became the only  state college in the postwar
South which was racially integrated.

In 1873 Henry Hayne, South Carolina’s black Secretary of State enrolled at the
University of South Carolina medical school, most of the faculty  and white
students immediately withdrew. The alumni of the college were  outraged at this
gesture toward racial equality, which threatened the  educational foundation of
the antebellum elite. The displaced alumni  inveighed against the integration of
the university and the provision of scholarship money for needy students.
However, during the four years  that the university was open to blacks, many
future black leaders seized the opportunity to obtain an education.  One
historian noted “…the  Radical university was not so bad as it has  been painted
by its critics and … for a limited number the institution constituted not only a
symbol of hope but an opportunity for real accomplishment.”  After the
resignation of faculty and the withdrawal of most white students, the  “Radical”
Board of Trustees resolved

…the resignations of these  gentlemen were caused by the admission, as a student
of the Medical  department of the University , of Hon. Henry E. Hayne, Secretary
of  State, a gentleman of irreproachable character, against whom the said
professors can suggest no objection except-in their opinion- his race;  and
recognizing these as the cause of these resignations, this Board  cannot regret
that a spirit so hostile to the welfare of our State, as  well as to the
dictates of justice and common humanity, will no longer  be represented in a
University which is the common property of all our  citizens without distinction
of race.

The integrated university  was ultimately a casualty in the Bourbon’s battle
against  Reconstruction, the destruction of integrated schools and the
resegregation of the university was one of the highest priorities of the alumni
who “redeemed” the state in 1876. Although the Ku Klux Klan is  not usually
thought of as the province of the

literati, in the  wake of the Republican victory in 1867 and the new
constitution of 1868, the alumni of the College organized and occupied
leadership positions  in the Klan.  It has sometimes been suggested that the
Klan was an  organization of poor whites, and in the lower ranks of the KKK,
this was the case. As one historian stated, “… one must lose complete faith in
Southern chivalry to believe that South Carolinians of standing could  have
committed the horrible crimes of which the Klan was actually  guilty.  Loss of
faith notwithstanding, the leadership of the Ku Klux  Klan was drawn from the
remnants of the antebellum elite. One northern  newspaper noted “It has been
with too much readiness accepted outside  this state that the poor “white trash”
committed these outrages when it  is now shown that they were planned and
executed by men of intelligence, and that these men individually and jointly,
are responsible for the  sentiment and actions of the communities.”  One
alumnus, Rev. John  Leland (’37), who was himself active in the KKK, noted that
in his  county, Laurens, leadership was drawn from “some of the oldest and most
respectable families in the county.

 Although the “invisible  empire” threatened death to those who revealed its
 secrets, during  Federal prosecutions in 1871, it was revealed that J. Banks
 Lyle (’56),  was the head of the statewide Klan.  From 1868 to 1871, he, and
 many  other of the gentlemen who had attended the College got a chance to
 socialize with their peers and redeem the degradation of the state by
 terrorizing their political opponents. As one historian has noted, “The
 highest leaders were drawn from the more or less educated planter and
 professional class, while the rank and file represented every element  from
 wealthy planter’s sons to illiterate poor whites.”  Investigation  by Federal
 prosecutors and others implicated Iridell Jones (’61), D.  Wyatt Aiken (’49),
 James Avery (‘48), William C. Black (’49), Dr. Rufus  Bratton (’42), General
 John Bratton (’50) Joseph F. Gist (’38) and  Rev. John Leland (’37) as leaders
 of the Klan in their localities.   As one  South Carolinian lady noted  “the
 original Ku Klux was composed of the  gentry - they were particular who they
 admitted.”  Because of the  substantial numbers of College men in South
 Carolina’s elite, the  leadership of the Ku Klux Klan, unlike the rank and
 file, was composed  almost exclusively of literate men.

One historian has described  the KKK in South Carolina aptly as “a weapon
designed to strike directly at the Republican political machine.”  Another
called the Klan “a  military force serving the interests of the Democratic
party, the  planter class, and all those who desired the restoration of white
supremacy.”  At the end of the Civil War, people who counted as white  were only
a little more than forty percent of South Carolina’s total  population. If any
significant proportion of the white population sided  with the Reconstruction
regime, then the Bourbon’s cause would be  hopeless. Thus it was absolutely
necessary for the leaders of the Klan  to insist upon strict racial solidarity.
This was achieved by persuasion if possible and enforced by violence if
necessary. Some yeoman farmers  were easily recruited because they were
sympathetic with the Klan. As  one William Robbins testified “The reason why I
joined the Ku Klux order was that they were more on my side-the Democrats- than
of the  Republicans”  Other white farmers joined the Klan only after they and
their families were threatened. The largely illiterate yeomen were  unaccustomed
to political activity and were habituated to leadership  from the gentry. The
first victims of Klan terror were impoverished  ignorant white people who were
so “cowardly and traitorous” that they  expressed little enthusiasm about
terrorism as a means to reinstate  South Carolina’s antebellum elite in a white
supremacist regime.  Among  those who confessed to Klan activity was one
Christenberry Tait, who  testified “…they told me I had better join for fear of
being killed;…”.  He identified “Banks Lyle as chief of the Klan” and mentioned
of some  local leaders that “they are respectable men and well off: I joined the
organization because they told me I would not be safe if I did not.”   Another
yeoman testified, “I joined the Ku Klux because I was afraid  they would whip me
if I didn’t; I am not able to read or write, and am  about 20 years old.”  The
testimony gathered by prosecutors is replete  with such claims.

	Illiteracy and coercion reappear again and  again in the confessions of
	low ranking Ku Kluxers in South Carolina.  The degree of coercion
	involved in individual cases may be debatable,  but the ignorance and
	illiteracy of these men is an undeniable legacy of the antebellum
	regime.  As one farmer confessed with ungrammatical  eloquence “… I
	can’t read or write a bit. The reason I joined the order, was, I
	suppose, because I hadn’t sense to do any better; nobody that  know’d
	any better didn’t tell me.”  Another low ranking member of the  Klan,
	William F. Ramsey, confessed:

…I know that most of those who joined the Klan did it for self protection; I
suppose we did not unite  and resist them because we did not have sense enough;
but I know a good  many didn’t join voluntarily; it seems to me that the men who
had good  learning and knowledge ought to have teached (sic) us better.

Q. Can you read or write?

A. Nary a one. I was raised in Spartanburg county.

It is noteworthy that Mr. Ramsey did not think his answer a non sequitur.  He
seemed to believe that being raised in Spartanburg county carried  with it the
presumption of illiteracy.

Iridell Jones (’61), the  spirited leader of the College cadets, was also a
founding member of the “Chester Conservative Clan”, which organized violent
opposition to the  activities of “…negroes and Radicals…”  D. Wyatt Aiken (’49)
who had  been wounded at Antietam, reportedly directed the assassination of
black political leader Benjamin F. Randolph in 1868.  Randolph, a preacher  and
state Senator, was gunned down in broad daylight on a train platform after a
Republican rally. The violent prelude to the elections of 1870  were
particularly threatening. From October to July 1870 the Klan killed four,
wounded seven by gunfire and whipped over two hundred people in  Spartanburg
alone. Six Republicans had their ears cut off.  In York  county more than 300
people were whipped and six were murdered between  December 1869 and July, 1870.
Beatings, rapes, murder and mutilation  were the hallmarks of Klan terror.

Despite the violence in the  upcountry, the Republicans won the election of
1870, and afterwards the  Klan was responsible for a wave of revanchist
violence, beating an  estimated 500 people who had voted Republican.  In
Laurensville on the  day after the election, an altercation between a black
constable and a  local white planter escalated into a gunfight, and then into a
struggle  along political and racial lines between armed mobs. Black militiamen
got rifles from the local armory but were overpowered by a crowd of  armed
whites, and three of the blacks were killed. The blacks and their  white
Republican sympathizers ran away, but several thousand armed  whites flooded
into town, split into squads and hunted down the fleeing  men. In the morning,
at least nine Republicans were dead. Rev. John  Leland (’37) wrote approvingly
of this rout: “…the severe lesson taught  our colored fellow citizens on the
20th of October 1870 has proved most  salutary. They then found out, that
however forbearing and longsuffering the white man has shown himself to be,
there was a limit beyond which  they could only go at the peril of their lives;
pass that limit, and he  would not only resist, he would kill.”

In Unionville a dozen  black militiamen were arrested for the murder of a former
Confederate  soldier. On January 4, 1871, forty or fifty Klansmen rode into
town,  broke into the jail and removed the five men thought to be most
responsible. The Klansmen led the men out of town and shot all five. Two were
killed, the other three were wounded and  recaptured in the  morning. When news
of the Klan actions reached the state capital, a  district judge ordered the
remaining prisoners removed to Columbia, but  because of the connivance of local
officials, the KKK was quicker than  the law. On February 9, 1871, before the
prisoners could be moved, an  well organized group of mounted Klansmen,
estimated at between eight and fifteen hundred men, took control of the town.
They surrounded the jail and demanded the keys from the deputy. The deputy
refused until the  Klansmen held a pistol to his wife’s head. The KKK took the
remaining  ten black prisoners from the jail. The morning revealed eight
corpses,  the other two were never found. Robert Wallace Shand (’59) noted in
his  diary that these killings “had a most quieting effect on the negroes.”
Other alumni chimed in, justifying the murders. James B Steadman (’52)
testified that as a result of these killings, Union County was “in a  better
condition today than I have known it since the war.”  Joseph F.  Gist (’38)
argued that the murders “did more for the peace and quiet of  this country than
anything that has ever transpired”  Lawyer A.W.  Thomson (’48), testified, “I
believe it is the shortest and most humane  road-for I am speaking in that way-
to becoming civilized”. He  acknowledged that it was a “terrible remedy” but
insisted that “ultimate good will follow from it.”

The Federal Ku Klux Klan  prosecutions of 1871 were a result of a campaign of
terror that spread  throughout the South and reached its climax in South
Carolina.  Well  informed and well financed leaders like Major James Avery (‘48)
and Dr.  Rufus Bratton (’42), J. Banks Lyle (‘56) were able to leave the state
temporarily and avoid legal jeopardy. The Federal enforcement of the Ku  Klux
Klan Acts failed to bring the leaders to justice, and those that  were
prosecuted were generally hapless ill educated farmers. Discouraged by the
meager results, Attorney General Ackerman, a Republican wrote:

I doubt whether from the beginning of the world until now a community,
nominally civilized, has been so fully under the domination of  systematic and
organized depravity….It has revealed a perversion of  moral sentiment among the
Southern whites, which bodes ill to that part  of the country for this
generation. Without a thorough moral renovation, society there for many years
will continue to be – I can hardly bring  myself to say savage, but certainly
very far from Christian.

In  the wake of the Ku Klux prosecutions of 1871, Klan activities waned, but
terror did not. In 1872, the opponents of Reconstruction cleverly  dodged legal
liability under the Ku Klux Acts by reorganizing the Klan  under the guise of
gun clubs, sabre clubs, and rifle clubs. The Carolina Rifle Club of Charleston
initially provided that only members  “prominent in the social, professional and
business life of Charleston”  should be inducted. All members were “South
Carolina gentlemen of the  olden time.”  Like the leadership of the KKK, the
organizers of the gun  clubs were drawn from the political elite, although as
these groups grew they began to include poor and ill educated members. These
organizations used rights guaranteed under the second Amendment to  defeat
rights guaranteed under the thirteenth, fourteenth, and  fifteenth.  The number
of gun clubs was unclear, but contemporary  estimates ranged from 240 to 400,
and the number of members was  variously estimated at 15,000 to 60,000, with the
lower number probably  being more accurate.  By 1876 the gun clubs developed a
statewide  organization under the leadership of General James Connor (’49), who
was rewarded for his work with the position of Attorney General after the
election of Wade Hampton (’36) to the Governorship.

The legal  aspect of the resistance to Reconstruction after the Klan
prosecutions  took the form of  “taxpayers conventions”. These conventions,
which met  in 1871 and 1874, raised the reasonable objection that the Republican
Reconstruction regime was saturated in fraud and bribery. Moreover, they argued
that the taxation which subsidized this corruption was onerous,  which was also
true. Alumni were conspicuous in both Conventions, which  condemned violence and
published conciliatory statements toward both the North and the former slaves.
The fact that these Conventions contained only white taxpayers, that members
were drawn exclusively from the  antebellum elite, and that all of these men
were Democrats, made some  skeptical about their sincerity. Such skepticism was
justified, because  the leaders of the resurgent Democratic party, more than
half of whom  were alumni of the College and former Confederates, were planning
to use the gun clubs to wrest power from the Republicans under the under the
pretence of an  election in 1876.

After more than a decade of  Republican rule in South Carolina, in 1876 the
party of Lincoln was  split between a faction of outright thieves and a faction
that wished to eliminate corruption but maintain biracial democracy. The
Democratic  minority was split between “fusionists” who were willing to work
with  Republican reformers and “straightout” Democrats who spurned compromise
in favor of militant white supremacy. Wade Hampton (’36), Matthew C.  Butler
(’56) and Martin W. Gary (’52) were the leaders of the Democratic party. They
were all College alumni and former Confederate generals.  Hampton (’36) was
willing to make at least verbal concessions to black  voters, while Gary (’52)
repudiated such paternalism in favor of  uncompromising racial domination.

During the campaign, Hampton  (’36) promised that “Not a single right enjoyed by
the colored people  today shall be taken from them. They shall be equals, under
the law, of  any man in South Carolina.” Some black voters were attracted by
Hampton’s conciliatory speeches, especially because he further promised, “
…better facilities for education than they have ever had before.”   Hampton was
also attractive to the some of the honest members of the  Republican party that
were disgusted with the regime’s pervasive  corruption. However, the bulk of
Hampton’s support came from the  “Straightout” faction led by Gary (’52).  Gary,
who was the architect of the Democratic victory in 1876, was a rabid racist who
disdained even  the pretence of appealing to black voters.  He insisted “That we
regard  the issues between the white and colored people of this State, and of
the entire south, as an antagonism of race, not a difference of  political
party; …white supremacy is essential to our continued  existence as a people.”
Despite his more evenhanded rhetoric, Hampton  (’36) was as committed to white
supremacy as Gary (’52). By 1890 he had  concluded that racial coexistence was
impossible and advocated a policy  decried by antebellum defenders of slavery as
chimerical, colonization  of American blacks in Africa.

​	As the election of 1876  approached, riots erupted between armed groups
of blacks and whites. On  July 4th in the town of Hamburg, two white men in a
buggy told a black  militia unit to move aside so they could pass, the militia
leader told  the young men to go around them and hard words were exchanged. The
young men produced pistols and the militia fixed bayonets. This political and
racial confrontation led to a legal complaint and an arrest warrant for the
leader of the militia. The whites retained Matthew C. Butler (’56)  as their
attorney, and his intentions were plain when he arrived at the  court with
several hundred armed white men. Butler (’56) demanded that  the black militia
surrender their arms to the white mob. If they refused he threatened to kill
them and burn the town. The thirty-nine black  militiamen refused to be
disarmed, taking refuge in a substantial brick  building used as an armory.
Gunfire erupted, and Butler sent to Augusta  for hundreds of white
reinforcements and a cannon. One white man was  killed in the exchange of
bullets, the whites used the cannon to destroy the building. The black militia
was routed and about twenty-five men  were captured.

	The victorious white mob, attired in  characteristic red shirts,
	ransacked black homes and shops in the town.  General Butler (’56)
	ordered the black prisoners to be jailed in Aiken.  The members of the
	gun club from Edgefield, led by the politically  ambitious Ben Tillman,
	were dissatisfied with mere incarceration. They  selected five of the
	prisoners and shot them in the head. The remaining  prisoners were then
	told to run, and they were fired on as they fled.   This event, the
	“Hamburg Massacre”, resulted in eight dead, seven black  and one white.
	Sporadic violence continued as election day approached. Blacks and white
	skirmished and rioted, with black militiamen sometimes holding their own
	against the redshirts, many of whom were Confederate  veterans. In
	September, Federal troops prevented a force of redshirts  led by Andrew
	Pickens Butler (’58) from a massacre of blacks pinned down in a swamp
	near Ellenton. This conflict, the “Ellenton Riot”, was the  last
	important intervention by Federal troops.  The redshirts had tasted
	blood prior to election day, and the rifle clubs, some of which had
	artillery, pursued a successful campaign of violence which led to South
	Carolina’s “redemption”.

The program of preelectoral intimidation pursued by the rifle clubs resulted in
a handful of white corpses and  perhaps a hundred black, and the Republican
Governor was forced to take  action.  After the Ellenton Riot, Governor
Chamberlain issued an order  disbanding the rifle clubs. The leaders, many of
whom were accomplished  lawyers, complied. The rifle clubs were then reformed
immediately under  new names. Organizations called “The First Baptist Church
Sewing Circle” and “Mothers Little Helpers” sprang up.  The “Allendale Mounted
Baseball Club” had 150 members on horseback and no baseballs. The  Columbia
Flying Artillery became the “Hampton and Tilden Musical Club”.  The eruption of
systematic violence destroyed the hopes for honest  Republicans or Democratic
fusionists.

The election of 1876 was  orchestrated by Martin Witherspoon Gary (’52) and his
“Straightout”  policy was enforced by red shirts. The Democratic agenda was
contained  in his thirty-three point “No. 1 Plan of the Campaign”. This document
was only partially made public. Borrowing from the successful “shotgun”  policy
used the previous year in Mississippi, the lynchpin of Gary’s  (‘52) program was
point 12. “Every Democrat must feel honor bound to  control the vote of at least
one Negro, by intimidation, purchase,  keeping him away as each individual may
determine how he may best  accomplish it.” Gary intended to use force and fraud
to restore white  supremacy. Some items left off the public version of the “No.
1 Plan of  the Campaign” were telling:

\3. That the Democratic Military Clubs are to be armed with rifles and pistols
and such arms as they may command…

\14. In speeches to Negroes you must remember that argument has no effect on
them: they can only be influenced by their fears, superstition and  cupidity. Do
not attempt to flatter or persuade them. Tell them plainly  of our wrongs and
our grievances, perpetrated upon us by their rascally  leaders. Prove to them
that we can carry the election without them and  if they co-operate with us, it
will benefit them more than it will us.  Treat them so as to show them, that you
are the superior race, and that  their natural position is that of subordination
to the white man. …

\16. Never threaten a man individually. If he deserves to be threatened, the
necessities of the times require that he should die. A dead radical is  very
harmless-a threatened radical or one driven off by threats from the scene of his
operations is often very troublesome, sometimes dangerous, always vindictive.

\21. In the month of September we ought to  begin to organize Negro clubs or
pretend that we have organized them and write letters from different parts of
the county giving the facts of  organization out from prudential reasons, the
names of the negroes are  to be withheld. Those who join are to be taken on
probation and are not  to be taken into full fellowship, until they have proved
their sincerity by voting our ticket.

In the both the nation and in the state  of South Carolina, the election of 1876
was marked by gross corruption  and the results were disputed. In some counties
of South Carolina more  votes were counted than the total number of voters in
the state census  of 1875.  Intimidation, bribery and fraud were pervasive.
After the  disputed election two antagonistic legislatures were organized, one
led  by Republican Governor Chamberlain and the other led by Democrat Wade
Hampton (’36). At one point two rival legislatures with two different  speakers
were attempting to conduct business simultaneously in the same  hall. Federal
troops, black militias and thousands of armed redshirts  swarmed into Columbia
and violence seemed imminent. “At least two  writers friendly to Hampton were
convinced that he would have led his  followers in rebellion against the United
States had the dispute not  been resolved in his favor.  One Civil War was
enough for the  politicians in  Washington. After much posturing and
maneuvering,  President Hayes, who owed his election to corrupt behind the
scenes  bargaining, ordered the removal of Federal troops from South Carolina.
With the last military prop gone, Governor Chamberlain conceded defeat  and the
Republican legislature disbanded. South Carolina had been  redeemed.

The Bourbon regime inaugurated by Wade Hampton (’36)  lasted until 1890 and it
was dominated by alumni of the College. His  Lieutenant Governor was William
Dunlap Simpson (’43), and his Attorney  General, James Conner (’49), had been
commander of state gun clubs  during the campaign of 1876. The Speaker of lower
House William H.  Wallace (’49) and the President pro tempore of the State
Senate Isaac D. Witherspoon, (’54) were both reliable men. As one historian has
noted,  between 1877 and 1890 “A roll call of Conservative leaders read like the
roster of the University’s alumni association.”   Despite attrition and the
losses from the war, more than half of the Bourbon leadership was  composed of
antebellum South Carolina College alumni.  Alexander C.  Haskell (’60) who had
served as chairman of the state Democratic  Executive Committee, was appointed
to the state Supreme Court, as were  Samuel McGowan (’41) and Henry McIver
(’46). William D. Simpson,  Hampton’s Lieutenant Governor,  (’43) became Chief
Justice.

A  majority of South Carolina’s Congressmen during this period were also
alumni. D. Wyatt Aiken (’49) and Matthew C. Butler (’56) who had been so
conspicuous in the violent resistance to Reconstruction, were sent to
Washington, as were James S. Cothran (’57), John H. Evins (’53), John  Bratton,
(’50),William H. Perry (’57) Charles H. Simonton (’49) and John S. Richardson
(’50). After his term as Governor, Hampton went to  Washington as Senator and
the Governor’s mansion was occupied by John P. Richardson (’49) and Thomas B.
Jeter (’46). Leroy Youmans (’52) served  as Attorney General. Since the election
of 1876 effectively eliminated  the Republican party from power, the leadership
positions in the  Democratic party was particularly important. Former
Confederate General  John Bratton (’50) and John D. Kennedy (’57) both served as
the Chairmen of State Democratic Executive Committee.

The Bourbons elected to Congress attempted to put the best possible gloss on the
violence and  electoral fraud that had brought them to office. Congressman John
H.  Evins (’53) acknowledged with perverse accuracy, that the election of  1876
in South Carolina was legitimate in the same way and for the same  reasons that
lynching was legitimate. “I admit that during this  revolution, novel and
unparalleled in its character, harsh and cruel  measures were sometimes resorted
to by men of my own race and party  which I have never attempted to justify, and
which deserve only the  palliation extended to the offense of those who swing a
horse thief upon a convenient limb and the incendiary to the nearest lamppost
without  the intervention of judge or jury…”

​	The traumatic events of the postwar era polarized the citizens of the
state and the emergence of  organized political partisanship stimulated some
political changes.  Apart from the dismantling of Reconstruction and the rout of
the  Republicans, the most conspicuous change introduced into state politics
between 1877 and 1890 was the abolition of dueling. After a highly  publicized
duel in which Col. Ellerbe B. C. Cash (’40?) killed Col.  William M. Shannon
(’41), Col. Cash was tried for murder and acquitted.  In response, the state
legislature passed South Carolina’s first  effective law against dueling in
1881. It was the last state in the  Union to do so. In addition an amendment was
added to the state  constitution requiring men elected to office to take an
“Anti-Dueling  Oath’. The Oath was only abolished in 1947.  This change in
political  mores was like a canary in a coal mine; it was a harbinger of the
erosion of the Collegiate elite and the evanescence of their revival.

​	The other legislative enactments of the Bourbon restoration were more
in keeping with the antebellum traditions of the state. While the
disenfranchisement of black voters has generally been associated with  Ben
Tillman’s farmer insurgency and the new constitution of 1895, in  1877-8 the
first of the Bourbon legislatures effectively disenfranchised the black majority
through the “Eight Box Law”.  Ostensibly designed to prevent fraud, the law took
advantage of the high rates of illiteracy  among blacks by requiring voters to
place their ballots for various  offices in eight separate boxes. Votes in the
wrong boxes were  disqualified; illiterate blacks received no assistance from
poll  workers, while illiterate whites did. To make sure the black majority
remained illiterate, the Reconstruction era laws which used poll taxes  to fund
public schools were repealed. The eight box law was successful.  Republicans had
cast 92,000 votes in 1876 but only 13,000 in 1888. In  1879 the legislature
prohibited racially mixed marriages, as the Black  Code had. The economic
subordination of former slaves was also legally  enforced with new laws favoring
employers. Oral contracts were made  legally binding and indebted laborers were
liable to be forcibly held on the land and forced to work off debt.  The
racially integrated  University of South Carolina which had been established by
the  Republican regime was crushed by the withdrawal of funding. The
legislature allocated only $1500, less than the salary for one  professor, so
the University could not open in 1877.

​	The alumni of the antebellum College knew that the revival of the
university would be essential to maintaining elite control of the newly
established  white supremacist regime. One influential Democratic legislator,
Charles H Simonton (’49), worked tirelessly to reopen the University as a
conservative institution. He hoped that the reorganized university would
reestablish antebellum norms and check the growing power of white  yeomen, just
as the College had done before the war. He anticipated that the university would
revive

…our notions of personal honor and  truth …the war and the events since the war
have demoralized our people. A whole generation has grown up uneducated. The
honor and name of the  state are to them but a dream of their fathers. A new
class are coming  into the control of the State, and a sort of red Republican
spirit is  abroad. The College must check and destroy this, must restore the
tone  of public opinion.”

​	The attempt to restore the university met  with the same resistance from
upcountry yeomen that the College had met  in the antebellum era, but in a new
political context. The constitution  of 1868, so vilified by the Bourbons,
provided white yeomen greater  political influence. Echoing the objections of
his antebellum  predecessors, one upcountry legislator opposed the university,
stating  “…we want no more such aristocratic institutions as the South Carolina
College was before the war, supported by the great body of tax payers,  and the
benefits enjoyed mostly by the rich.”  A Columbia newspaper  noted, “This is the
first time for nearly sixty years that the House of  Representatives has not had
among its members a large and influential  number of university alumni ready to
do battle”  Even more ominous was a split in the Bourbon leadership. Martin W.
Gary (’52) the leader of the “Straightout” Democrats, resented the prestige and
power of Governor  Wade Hampton (’36). In 1878 Gary (’52) opposed reorganizing
the  university as a state Senator because of his antagonism toward Hampton.
The bill to revive the University passed the Senate only on the tiebreak vote of
Lieutenant Governor William Dunlap Simpson (‘43).

​	With  an appropriation of $12,500, the university was reorganized and
the  classical curriculum reestablished in 1882. The University catalog for  the
years 1882-1886 described the institution as “now finally and fully
reorganized, it will aspire to render to the state the same high and  honorable
service as in the past.”  In February, 1882 the Clariosophic  society was
revived, and the first “order of business was to cut the  minutes of 1873-77 out
of the books, thereby destroying the records of  an unsavory interlude and
restoring a specious continuity.”  A new  undergraduate publication, the
University Collegian, was established and it contained much that was a reprise
of the antebellum politics of the  College undergraduates. One young man
anachronistically advocated  proslavery views.  Another latter day Confederate
undergraduate opposed  Henry Grady’s idea of a “New South”, invoking the
revisionist Bourbon  view of Civil War. He wrote “No, it was not for slaves that
the gallant  Confederates died, it was against oppression from the North, it was
for  the principles of justice.” Grady’s proposal for a “New South” was
improper, he argued, because it entailed that “the honor and pride of  the South
would be dashed to pieces.”  The white supremacist revival of  the University
institutionalized the gentry’s craving for self  justification and self
deception. This seemed to augur well for the  Bourbon regime, but Simonton’s
(’49) fears of “a new class” coming to  control the state were well founded.

​	Ben Tillman’s rise to power  came at the expense of the University and
the elite which sustained it.  Tillman’s constituents were marginally literate
white yeomen farmers,  described dismissively by his gentleman opponents as
people who “carry  pistols in their hip pockets, who expectorate upon the floor,
who have  no tooth brushes, and comb their hair with their fingers.”  Tillman
demanded that the state fund a separate agricultural college accessible  to
yeomen. Tillman’s constituents bitterly resented the University and  the elite
that sustained it.  In 1887 the legislature established an  agricultural annex
to the University as an expedient way of denying  Tillman’s demand for a
separate agricultural institution, but Tillman  was not satisfied and gained
much yeoman support.  In the campaign of  1890, undergraduates from the
university heckled Tillman when he gave  stump speeches, but they were playing
with fire, because Tillman’s  political ascendancy was based upon his opposition
to the leading  Bourbons, who were largely coextensive with the Collegiate
elite.

The rise of Ben Tillman marked the end of an era. Although he had been
associated with redshirt violence, the mores of politics had changed; he refused
an illegal challenge to duel a political opponent in 1885  without political
damage.  He supported white supremacy but not the  antebellum elite which had
led it. He was a rabid racist who became  notorious and popular through his
strenuous advocacy of lynching.  He  tapped into the resentment of yeomen by
pointing out that the eight box  law could be used to disenfranchise illiterate
whites, and that some  Bourbons proposed to do exactly that.  He looked forward
to the day when the Collegiate elite would be swept away complaining that “These
men …  worship the past and are marching backwards when they march at all...”.
Tillman said of his opponent in the gubernatorial election of 1890,  General
John Bratton (’50), “He sees through antebellum spectacles, his  gaze is toward
the grave.”

Early in his 1890 campaign for  governor of South Carolina, Tillman issued the
“Shell Manifesto” in  which he attacked his Bourbon opponents for being an
“aristocratic  coterie who were educated at and sought to monopolize everything
for  South Carolina College.”  Tillman’s insurgent yeomen deposed the
Conservative regime established after 1876 by remnants of South  Carolina’s
antebellum elite with a resounding popular mandate in the  gubernatorial
election. The election of Tillman in 1890 signalized a new kind of popular
politics in South Carolina. The tone of politics  changed from racist
aristocratic nostalgia to racist plebian resentment. Tillman described himself
as a ‘common man”.  He stated to an admiring  crowd, “I like to cut living flesh
with the knife” , and much of his  political appeal to the yeoman farmers who
supported him lay in his  persona as a happy hog butcher. In the wake of his
victory “Pitchfork  Ben” diverted funding from the College to a new agricultural
college,  Clemson.

Tillman’s opponent, General John Bratton (’50) insisted  “the College is the
Cornerstone of our system.”.  Tillman knew he was  right; he eliminated the
funding for the traditional classical  curriculum of the College and established
state funding for rival  Clemson University, (which was an agricultural and
mechanical university accessible to at least some yeomen).  In so doing he
undermined the  long-term prospects of his rivals and assured the ascendancy of
the  yeoman centered Herrnvolk populism which he represented. South Carolina
College had been the institutional matrix in which South Carolina’s  gentry had
welded its sons together to form a self-conscious social  class with common
economic interests and a coherent political  philosophy. It was the fulcrum for
the leverage exerted by the planter  elite in state politics before 1865 and
after 1876. The fate of the  College was inextricable from that of the
slaveholding gentry that  sustained it. Between the first and last watershed
elections in  nineteenth century South Carolina, 1800 and 1890, South Carolina
College had been the most important source of men and ideas in the state.

The men who were ousted by Tillman’s ascendancy were the last specimens of
South Carolina’s antebellum gentlemen. Tillman’s election marked a new  period
of discontinuity, in which the influence wielded by gentlemen of  the old
school, which had been so dazzling in the earlier political  history of the
state and the nation, flickered and went out by the end  of the century. In
South Carolina, Jeffersonianism did not triumph until ninety years after Mr.
Jefferson’s election and the end of College  funding signaled the end of South
Carolina’s ancien regime. The few  remaining dinosaurs of the Collegiate elite
died or retired by 1900.  Despite their electoral defeat however, the political
beliefs of the  alumni survived the regime which created them; their
intellectual legacy flourished well into the twentieth century. As one historian
noted:

The ideological legacy if the Bourbons is probably more significant than  race
separation or a one party system. They formed, out of the chaos of  military
devastation and Reconstruction, an image of the south united by bloodshed in a
noble battle for independence. They paid tribute- lip  service by some,
conviction in others- to glories of what had existed  before the war and the
nobility of the war. Some found fault with the  antebellum South but few
discarded it. From 1880 to 1950, few white  southerners challenged the edifice
built by the Bourbons. The holiness  of the Democratic party and the white race
together with reverence for  the Confederacy and the conviction of the horror of
reconstruction have, with the protestant faith, formed the basic creed of the
white  southerner.”

The motto written on the original seal of South  Carolina College was “Emollit
mores nec sinit esse feros”. This means,  “It makes the character gentle and
does not allow it to be savage”. If  gentle means “refined’ or ‘polite” the
motto was realized, if gentle  means “peaceful” or “mild” it was not. If savage
means “barbarous” or  “uncouth” the motto was realized, if savage means
“violent” or “fierce”  the motto was not. A less uncertain motto might have been
“Thymos” the  Greek word for “spiritedness”, because the alumni of the College
were  more often honorable than wise.
