---
title: On Teaching
date: 2021-09-14
src: https://michaelsugrue.substack.com/p/on-teaching
---

TEACHING

A teacher must  pursue a lifetime program of serious and systematic reading. The earlier in life you start and the more sedulously you pursue your program, the  better. There is no elevator to the upper floors of literacy, you must  climb the stairs. Before I entered college I read indiscriminately and  omnivorously, happily thrashing about in any portion of a library,  always with more exuberance than method. In college, I found out to my  astonishment and horror and joy the amount of knowledge that genuinely  well read people had mastered. As I always knew I was going to be a  professor, I thereafter undertook to read the best writers and learn  whatever lessons I was capable of learning. I gravitated to writers that “spoke” to me, (as anyone should) and I read the complete works of my  chosen individuals, so I could at least make some coherent progress.  During the three summers between years in college, I read all of  Shakespeare, then all of Plato then all of Nietzsche. From Shakespeare I learned what can be done with the English language; it had never  occurred to me that such overwhelming power could be combined with an  almost inhuman subtlety and precision. From Plato, I learned that Truth  is deeply erotic; that Socrates personified what was best in poetry,  divinity and knowledge; and that my many self imposed deficiencies  required that I change my life. From Nietzsche, I learned that every  insight is partial blindness, the value of intellectual generosity and  that the only readers worthy of any great thinker are those who unafraid to risk their entire intellectual inheritance on a single roll of the  dice.

The University of Chicago where I went to college is  sometimes referred to as the “teacher of teachers”. This is a fair  description. But it is equally true that any professor worth his salt is necessarily a teacher of teachers, because he continuously teaches  himself. Teachers must first be learners and can never cease thier  learning until death grants them emeritus status. U of C is where I  learned that a teacher must be dialectical and able to think on his  feet, responding to most questions or objections on the fly, without  breaking his flow. Improvising at the piano is requires more, not less  understanding of music than playing from sheet music.

In teaching  my first university class at Columbia I was too severe, my students  learned but they were scared of me and I gave them good reason to  be. All cruelty is the product of weakness, and I was needlessly hard on them because I was scared of them. Although I had to teach it, I did  not comprehend the Western intellectual tradition at the time. I was  twenty-seven, only seven or eight years older than these undergraduates, I was insecure and did not know what I was doing. I had also suffered  through too many years of graduate seminars where the amount that people spoke was all too often inversely proportional to the amount they  understood. I vowed to myself that I would not suffer fools gladly once I got my own classroom. Foolishly, I treated my first class of  undergraduates as my equals and I was withering in my contempt for wrong answers because I was far too certain that I knew what the right ones  were. It was not until the following summer that I realized they are not my equals and if they were then I had no business teaching the class.  Learn to shut up and instead of talking, ask yourself, “What kind of  thinking would produce a mistake like that?”

Good teachers must  work at talking less and listening more. In French, there's a great  expression to describe what speakers do when they indulge in rambling  replies that don't focus on the initial question: “noyer le poisson”  which means, "drowning the fish". Learn to spare the fish: piscine mercy is a pedagogical virtue. Teachers too often stop listening when they  come to a juncture where a students is clearly wrong, but it is  imperative to listen a little longer to identify the earlier juncture  where the student stopped being right. Every teacher must embrace the  fact that being wrong is the students’ job. Ignorance is what keeps us  in business. Teachers should be heartened by the emergence of mistakes  and never forget that being wrong in interesting ways is unteachable and a sign of genius, as Aristotle said about metaphor. If you are ever in a classroom where the students already know what you are trying to teach  them you are wasting everybody’s time and you should go get honest work.

Whenever I coach young, newly minted assistant professors about teaching, I  always insist on “Sugrue’s Law” which is, “If you need notes you’re not  prepared”. By all means, write some ideas out or put them on the board,  but one must throw the paper away just as class begins. The artwork is  not something outside of them on a piece of paper: they are the artwork. Reading aloud is not teaching: if this is the best you can do, send  them an email instead of teaching class. Teaching is a performance. Look up the Greek roots of the word enthusiasm. The late great jazz  saxophonist John Coltrane is the model for all performing artists of  every kind. His music burned like magnesium, so brightly that people  were compelled to avert their eyes. Trane taught the world about music  by being there, on the cutting edge of a coming into being where the  Holy Spirit takes over and the artist is as surprised as the audience at what they are witnessing. 

On the very few occasions when I have  listened to the lectures I’ve taped, I’ve sometimes been surprised by  what I hear. I think to myself, “that’s interesting…I didn’t know I knew that.” This is how Trane sometimes soloed for an hour or more without  repeating himself or even knowing what he was going to play next. For  those of a scientific bent, I believe this might be described as  “listening” to the silent right hemisphere of the brain, which is  speechless because it does not control language. Those that are by  nature intellectually right-handed in particular must strive to  articulate the silence of the left hand. This comes easier to  intellectual southpaws like myself. This Dionysian ecstasy I am talking  about is what Chuang-Tzu was gesturing at in his parable of the butcher  and the emperor. It is important to have some silent time before class  when the students are not to bother you as you put some ideas on the  board for them to follow and take notes from. You cannot enter the Zen  state described by the butcher while distracted. Abgelassenheit, as  Meister Eckhardt instructed us. Learn to focus your mind like a  magnifying glass. Class begins when your mind sets thoughts on fire. 

I also insist that young professors must have something to say that is  worth hearing and if they don’t they are wasting everybody’s time. When  lecturing about Locke or Descartes or whoever, one can always tell the  students what Quentin Skinner says, or what Leo Strauss says, or what  some other authority says, but the real question is what do you say. Any professor that cannot answer that question has no business being behind a podium. After figuring out something to say, paradoxically, the next  step in becoming teacher is that you must learn how to refrain from  saying it. There can be no wisdom without silence. I said that one must  have something to say, not that one must say it. As the Fool said to  King Lear, you must have "more than two tens in a score".

You are  trying to show your students how to think, not what to think. No teacher worth paying attention to is trying to mass produce bad imitations of  himself. The dialectical apotheosis of teaching is reached when you  students develop the ability to tell you that you are wrong, and why  they think so, as Aristotle did with his teacher Plato. You are a  midwife helping the students give birth to themselves. This activity is  the inverse of a snake eating its own tail. It is the inconceivable, the miraculous, the impossible: something from nothing. The exemplars of  this active silence for me have always been the great Jewish rabbis,  like Maimonides or Hillel, because they always seemed to say less than  they knew. All teaching is seduction, as a careful examination of  Socrates or Nietzsche will disclose. Driven by an eros that they do not  know they have, this withholding of speech brings students circling  back, like sharks drawn to blood in the water. Socrates understood that  capable students, driven by an impulse that they neither control nor  understand, are easily whipped into an Apollonian rather than a  Dionysian frenzy, because unbeknownst to them they desire Something Else more than they desire air. Teaching at the university level is the  intellectual Dance of the Seven Veils, where you always modestly keep an Eighth in reserve.

The final stage of development for a teacher  is to learn how to become transparent. The greatest practitioners of any performing art are masters of sprezzatura: they make the  extraordinarily difficult appear easy, effortless, inevitable – which it emphatically is not. This is perhaps best understood by a musical  metaphor. When you listen to a beginner practice the piano, all that can be heard is the awkward, intrusive presence of the player, which is  realized in a river of mistakes flowing from the keyboard. In contrast,  the greatest interpreters of any musical tradition, the late great  Vladimir Horowitz playing Mozowski’s Etude number 1 for example, were  great because they mastered the art of getting out of the  way, dis-covering the composition and unveiling the music so it could  finally be seen. The height of musicianship is to figure out how not to  be heard, finding apparently effortless repose in the inaudible source  of all music. Listen to Carlos Santana solo as a prime example. He makes virtuosity look easy. It takes natural gifts plus much work to become a human superconductor that allows a perfectly unhindered flow from  Something Else with no human impedance. 

When teaching the Great  Books, you must become transparent, a silent musician. You must learn  how to get out of the way and let Dante or Dostoyevsky or Sophocles or  whoever do the talking. Stop flattering yourself; you are not that  interesting. These great minds are smarter than you are and you must  dispense with your ego and learn how to resist the temptation to upstage them. When you are teaching, always remember: This is not about  you. This is the only way to completely command a seminar room or  lecture hall. After articulating some knowledge and coming up with  something worth listening to, you must then say less than you know and  learn how to shut up. As Kant said, "There are many things I believe  that I’ll never say, but I will never say what I don’t believe.”

