---
title: Syllabus for Western Tradition
date: 2021-08-09
src: https://michaelsugrue.substack.com/p/syllabus-for-western-tradition
---

**Humanities 30(4)-6-7-8-9**

**Course Description:** This course examines selected landmarks in Western culture, combining  politics, ethics, literature, philosophy, history, science, psychology,  art and religion from antiquity to the present.

**OVERVIEW**

The purpose of this class is to help fish realize that they are wet.

Like it or not, we are Westerners. This is not an option. It is a fact. We  are, in fact, speaking English at an American university in the early  21st century. The questions we ask, the objections we raise, the  assumptions we make, the categories we use (*and*  our misgivings about them), are all the products of centuries of  historical development. We are not free to choose whether we will be  influenced by the Western intellectual legacy, our only choice is  whether or not to be *conscious* of it the pervasive influence still exerted by earlier thinkers. Understanding the genesis  of the categories that structure the world around us offers the only  genuine possibility of freedom from the tyranny of unexamined ideas and  the futility of unexamined lives.

This course is an  overview of the Western high cultural tradition. It explores the  development of Western literature, philosophy and history. We begin with the ancient River Valley Civilizations then we turn our attention  Athens and Jerusalem moving from Hellenistic Greece and Rome to the  Christian Middle Ages, continuing through modernity to the contemporary  impasse of globalized Western culture. We will examine landmark works  that have made the West, and the world, what it was and is. At the end  of the two year course, you will be more sophisticated in asking and  answering two related questions, “What do you mean?” and “How do you  know?” 

This course will introduce students to what the Germans  call “Kultur”, high culture as a coherent historical tradition.  Contending conceptions of the human condition will be examined within  the traditions that combined to form the West. This class is also about  various ways of thinking about the organization of society, political  order and change, and economic relations that have been influential at  various points in Western history and the influence these ideas continue to exert upon us. Along the way, we consider the Western tradition in,  among other things, philosophy, science, literature, politics, history,  ethics, art, religion and psychology. We will aim both to understand  these authors on their own terms and to assess their relevance to our  contemporary intellectual concerns. This course is selective, not  comprehensive. It is merely a portion of a vast network of ideas and  achievements and events that would take more than a lifetime to fully  absorb. 

You will be busy. Take the Bible course as a  sophomore in the Fall term. The Western Tradition course is designed for upperclassmen (it is best started by juniors) who are willing to  grapple with a collection of ideas which, taken together, are some of  the “best that has been said and thought”. It will cover four terms,  (for two years) and it will be strenuous. Permission of the instructor  is required. It will demand active class time and **at least** eight hours per week of reading, often more. Either make the commitment or don’t bother asking for permission to enroll. There is no other way.

There is no elevator to the upper floors of cultural competence, you have to  climb the stairs. Class preparation will consume much of your time and  energy if you are doing it right. This class is old school. Learning is  work, not entertainment. Have fun on your own time. On my time do your  reading. This class is far too small to hide in during a three hour  discussion. This class is only suitable for serious students who are  willing to make a commitment to intensive study of the landmark works of the western intellectual tradition. We will read at least one text per  class, sometimes more, for fifteen weeks per term. Those that are  capable of rising to this challenge may find this a profoundly rewarding experience. These books will speak to you if you will listen. You will  feel new grooves being cut into your brain. If you apply yourself  diligently, these books can change your life. This class is a small step toward becoming “well read”. There are parts of the university library  where the students in this class often gather the night before our  weekly class to commiserate about the intellectual tasks required. I  would encourage you to do so, because you’ll get no sympathy from me. 

Students are responsible for the content of the readings and for the content of  lectures and discussions. Every student is responsible for getting the  reading done **beforeevery** class. I can *explain* these books for you but I cannot *understand* them for you. Only you can do that. It is expected that the students  will read some selected texts of the assigned works before each term  begins. You will thus have assigned reading during the summer and  Christmas vacations. You must get control of your time, because once  enrolled in this course you are on *my* schedule,  not yours. I encourage you to begin reading as soon as you get over the  initial shock of this list. First a cover to cover of the Bible, to  encounter the mythos of Jerusalem, then the Western Tradition.

**Humanities 304: The Bible and Western Culture**

\1. Pentateuch: Genesis, Exodus

\2. Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy

\3. History: Joshua, Judges, Ruth

\4. Samuel, Kings, Chronicles

\5. Ezra, Nehemiah, Tobit, Judith, Esther, Maccabees

\6. Wisdom: Psalms, Proverbs, Sirach

\7. Job, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, Wisdom of Solomon

\8. Prophets: Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamentations, Baruch Ezekiel

\9. Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Haggai,      Zechariah, Malachi 

\10. Synoptic Gospels: Mark, Matthew

\11. Luke, Acts of the Apostles

\12. Epistles: Paul to Romans, 1st and 2nd Corinthians, Philippians, 1st Thessalonians, Timothy, Titus, Philemon

\14. Epistles: James, Peter, John, Jude, Timothy, Titus, Colossians, Ephesians, 2nd Thessalonians

15 Gospel of John and Revelation

**HUMANITIES 306 GREECE**

Summer Reading = Iliad and Odyssey, Republic, Nicomachean Ethics

\1.    Gilgamesh

\2.    Homer, Iliad 

\3.           Odyssey

\4.    Waterfield, The Presocratics,

\5.    Herodotus, History of the Persian Wars, (I, 1-8; II, 35-98; III, 1-87; IV, 1-144;

​                V, 1-16; VI, 102-117; VII, 1-56, 198-235; VIII, 40-112; IX, 58-79)

\6.    Thucydides, Peloponnesian War, (I 1-23; II 35-54; III 70-85; V 84-116; VI 27-28)

\7.    Aeschylus, The Orestia, 

\8.    Sophocles, Oedipus Rex, Oedipus at Colonus, Antigone

\9.    Euripides, Bacchae, Medea, Trojan Women

\10.   Aristophanes, Clouds, Frogs, Lysistrata,  

\11.   Plato, Symposium (Bernadete translation, Chicago)

\12.        Republic, (Bloom translation, Vintage) 

\13.        Apology, Crito, Phaedo (Cooper, Plato Five Dialogues, Hackett)

\14.    Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics

\15.            Politics 

**HUMANITIES 307 ROME and CHRISTIANITY**

Christmas Reading = Lucretius, Dante, Koran

\1.    Lucretius, On the Nature of the Universe,

\2.    Virgil, The Aeneid

\3.    Gnostic Gospel of Thomas; 

​      Tertullian, On The Flesh of Christ, (Chapter 5; 4)

​              On the Prescription of Heretics, (Chapter 7)

​      Origen, First Principles, (Chapter 1)

​      Justin Martyr, Apology 

​      Wilkin, The Christians As The Romans Saw Them, Chapter 1, Pliny and Trajan

\4.    Horace, Satires; 

​      Juvenal Satires; 

​      Lucian, Philosophers for Sale

\5.    Marcus Aurelius, Meditations 

\6.    Augustine, Confessions 

\7.    Koran

​      Song of Roland

\8.    Dante, Divine Comedy, Inferno,

​                         Purgatorio (1-5, 25-33);  

​                         Paradisio, (1, 4, 6, 8, 10-13, 18, 20, 24, 29, 33)

\9.    William of Ockham, Summa Totius Logicae, (I,12) 

​                       Sentences of Peter Lombard, (i, dist. 27, qu. 2, K)

​      Aquinas, Five Proofs from the Summa Thelogica

​      Meister Eckhardt, German Sermons

\10.   Chaucer, The Canterbury Tales (Pardoner, Miller, Wife of Bath Tales)

​      Luther, On the Freedom of the Christian,

\11.   More, Utopia

\12.   Machiavelli, The Prince, 

​                Mandragola

\13.   Cervantes, Don Quixote, (I- Dedication, Chap. 1,2,4,8; II- Dedication, Chap. 74)

\14.   Shakespeare, Measure for Measure

\15.               King Lear

**HUMANITIES 308 THE MODERN WEST**

Summer Reading = Hobbes, Spinoza, Goethe

 \1.    Montaigne, Essays,    

 \2.    Descartes, Discourse on Method 

 \3.    Pascal, Pensees 

 \4.    Hobbes, Leviathan (Books I and II)

 \5.    Spinoza, The Ethics

 \6.    Locke, Second Treatise 

 \7.    Moliere, The Misanthrope, Tartuffe

 \8.    Hume, Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding

​      Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Book I, Chapter 1 pin factory and invisible hand

 \9.    Kant, Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals 

 \10.   Blake, Songs of Innocence and Experience

 \11.   Hegel, Philosophy of History, (Introduction)

 \12.   Goethe, The Sorrows of Young Werther 

 \12.   Rousseau, Discourse on the Arts and Sciences

​      Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in France       

 \13.   Kierkegaard, Fear and Trembling; 

​                Either/Or, Volume 1, (Diapsalmata, The Rotation Method)

 \14.   Mill, Utilitarianism

​      Marx, Theses on Feuerbach

 \15.   Dickens, Hard Times

**HUMANITIES 309 CONTEMPORARY CIVILIZATION**

Christmas Reading = Dostoyevsky, Mann, Tolstoy

\1.    Tolstoy, War and Peace

\2.    Dostoyevsky, The Brothers Karamazov

\3.    Nietzsche, The Gay Science 

\4.    Freud, An Outline of Psychoanalysis, 

​           Civilization and Its Discontents

\5.    Joyce, Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man

\6.    Weber, Science as a Vocation

​            Politics as a Vocation

\7.    Huxley, Brave New World

\8.    Ayer, Language, Truth and Logic

\9.    Mann, Dr. Faustus

\10.   Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations

​                 Lecture on Ethics

\11.   Piaget, Structuralism

\12.   Habermas, Legitimation Crisis

\13.   Burgess, A Clockwork Orange

\14.   Rawls, A Theory of Justice

\15.   McCarthy, Blood Meridian
