---
title: Remarks on the 2016 Election
subtitle: Trump was conjured up and enabled by a grossly dysfunctional Governing Elite
date: 2021-08-22
src: https://michaelsugrue.substack.com/p/remarks-of-the-2016-election
---

The Age of Trump

A few  elections ago, I heard a white working class Pat Buchanan supporter say  “…the Democrats represent blacks, the Republicans represent rich people, who represents me?” I was worried about this at the time because it  seemed only a matter of time till the chickens came home to roost in the form of rightwing white identity politics. The Tea Party was the first  iteration of this impulse. In the 2016 election, a billionaire caudillo  arrived peddling something new in American politics: white working class Chavismo. The tribalism that has come to pervade American politics has  now reached its tragic culmination.

All politics is local. The  elites of the Bos-Wash corridor and Silicon Valley lost touch with the  concerns of the white blue collar workers that are given voice in so  many Bruce Springsteen ballads.  The cognitive elite, composed largely  of technocratic Ivy Leaguers, dismissed the plight of globalization’s  losers as the unfortunate outcome of irresistible and generally  progressive economic forces.  Blue collar Americans residing in fly-over country were supposed to take one for the team. The dramatic growth of  income inequality was not the coastal elite’s problem. The fact that  American blue collar workers experienced massive downward mobility as  they were forced to compete with a billion plus impoverished Asian  workers for unskilled and semiskilled jobs was not their problem either. In this last election, American workers have made it their problem.  This is why Trump carried the Rust Belt, much to the surprise of  pollsters and pundits.

By 2016, the Democrats had largely  abandoned their traditional economic class based politics for the  “identity” politics of victimized subgroups. “Intersectionality” and  similar buzzwords replaced the “kitchen table” issues that had  previously concerned a large swath of the white working class. Race,  class and gender, the holy trinity of the academic left, was the focus  of the Democratic leadership, although gender and race were greatly  highlighted at the expense of class. This had been particularly evident  in the Obama administration. The core of the Democratic coalition going  back to the New Deal was the unionized white blue collar worker. Now  there is no Democratic party worth discussing beyond big cities and the  coasts. The current Democratic party is focused on identity based  interest groups combined with white collar, college educated people who  have managerial jobs, soft hands and 401Ks: it is now a coalition of  minority groups allied with the “winners” in the globalized information  based economy.

The American electorate is unfamiliar with Davos.  Sand Hill Road in Silicon Valley is a very atypical place, alien to the  Americans who drive pick up trucks and change their own oil. The values  of San Francisco are not those of Akron or Grand Rapids or Janesville or Scranton. Wall Street and Main Street have different priorities. It is  testimony to the state of American political life that this even needs  mentioning. In an important new book, Hillbilly Elegy, J.D. Vance shows  persuasively how the transformation of work in America has generated a  pervasive hopelessness among the least educated inhabitants of white  America. Trump was notorious for saying, “I love poorly educated  people”. They loved him right back, especially given the ill-disguised  contempt they received from the political elites of both parties. They  may not have much education, but they aren’t stupid and they are  fiercely proud. The white working class Trumpistas know perfectly well  that Trump lacks even the rudiments of moral decency. If they can’t  share the wealth, they will share the pain. If elites make them suffer,  they will make sure elites suffer too.

Charles Murray, in Coming  Apart shows that culture matters at least as much as economics, and that the decline of stabilizing institutions like family and community has  reached dangerous levels among the white working class. The erosion of  the values that made individuals productive citizens has eviscerated the life chances of the bottom half of white America. Standards of behavior have been declining for decades among the least affluent parts of the  white population: the work ethic and social cohesion that marked earlier working class neighborhoods is largely gone. Instead, anomie prevails.  The growth of predatory payday loan operations in declining  neighborhoods is symptomatic of the breakdown of the informal social  networks that used to reduce the dangers of working class life.  Simultaneously, the thinning out of civil society, (churches, little  league, scouting, labor unions, volunteer groups like the Red Cross,  etc; the “Bowling Alone” phenomenon) is linked to a marked increase in  social pathologies like drug addiction, semi-permanent unemployment, and petty criminality.  It’s every man for himself in an environment marked by a pernicious social Darwinism. Many Americans are one paycheck from  disaster.

Those that were paying attention could discern the  desperation of those left behind by America’s globalized,  technologically dynamic economy. Angus Deacon, a Nobel Prize winner in  economics, and Ann Case, a professor at Princeton, recently produced a  paper showing that only one American demographic, white male non-college graduates, actually has a rising mortality rate. The principal cause is a 330% increase in "suicide by alcohol and opiate poisoning." There is a genuine crisis in the white working class, which the Democratic party,  traditionally the advocate of American workers, has consistently  ignored. The real as opposed to the symbolic issues of the dispossessed  were consistently marginalized. For all her talk of “working families”,  Hillary Clinton could not convince important segments of the high school educated working class that she understood their plight. They were more interested in survival than in the Supreme Court or gun control or  greenhouse gases or Putin’s intervention in Syria.

Hillary  Clinton was an obviously flawed candidate. The taint of avarice,  cronyism and corruption was ineradicable. “Its my turn” is not a good  reason to be president. It is worth noting that she has never been a  natural politician like Bill Clinton. She correctly made the strategic  decision to steer her candidacy to the left to combat the populist  socialism of Bernie Sanders. After securing the nomination she blundered by failing to triangulate back to the middle of American politics,  underestimating the importance of the white working class in favor of an appeal to Sanders’ progressive milennials. She often came off as  inauthentic, patronizing and effete, because she has always lacked the  common touch that came so easily to her husband. Bill Clinton, who is a  genuine product of the white working class, has always had far better  political instincts than his wife, who is an icon of progressive middle  class propriety.

“Black Lives Matter” was Hillary Clinton’s  “Sister Soulja” moment. Politically correct, cold and calculating, she  blew her crucial, once in a lifetime opportunity because her political  instincts were never as acute as her husband’s. Bill Clinton would have  stood his ground, knowing intuitively that rank and file white Democrats wanted reassurance that the party was not held hostage by radical  minority movements and that their concerns would receive respectful  consideration proportionate to their electoral importance. Hillary  Clinton did not seize this opportunity. After a series of BLM  demonstrations targeting the two Democratic frontrunners, Bernie Sanders made the obvious and innocuous claim that “All lives matter”. Abetted  by a partisan media that were more interested in entertainment than  information, a small but highly visible fringe element of America’s  black population excoriated Senator Sanders for “insensitivity”, which  is, as a matter of course to those who know the protocol, a prelude to  America’s omnibus term of abuse for those who disagree with black  radicals: racism. The intimation that Senator Sanders is a racist is  preposterous, but Hillary Clinton and her handlers saw blood in the  water.  She moved to outflank Senator Sanders on the left as she had  done on gun control.

Bernie quickly caved into pressures from BLM, apologizing profusely for his insensitivity and begging forgiveness.  Hillary couldn’t stand the possibility of being seen as less sensitive  than her opponent, (which in contemporary politics is regarded as the  summum bonum), so she pandered to BLM ostentatiously, treating Sanders  with a supercilious, maiden aunt, “more sensitive than thou”  disapproval. When the white working class heard the Democrats distance  themselves from the harmless proposition that “All lives matter”, bowing and scraping and apologizing for the alleged “racism” of what was at  worst an innocuous truism, they felt disregarded and dismissed.  They  took this as an indication that the Democrats did not believe their  lives mattered, that loud radical fringe groups mattered more than them.

The progressive Democrats’ scorched earth approach to the culture wars  alienated much of the working class. The Left has won the culture wars,  but they are often lacking in pragmatism and did not know when to stop.  The moralistic condescension over transgender issues affronted the  values of many residents of North Carolina, which Trump unexpectedly  won. Many working class Democrats in North Carolina resented what they  regarded as the normalizing of the abnormal and the lionizing of a  miniscule percentage of the population that they regarded as mentally  ill. Simultaneously, their values were calumniated. The grossly  disproportionate Democratic focus on peripheral symbolic issues like  transgenderism, which speaks to a tiny fraction of the population and is largely a solution in search of a problem, repulsed much of the white  working class. The cast of RuPaul’s Drag Race accounts for relatively  few votes. North Carolina is not Manhattan. As the leftist filmmaker  Michael Moore put it, Trumpism is the disrespected white working class  giving the middle finger to arrogant elites.

Ask yourself, how  many people in North Carolina have read Foucault and are interested in  “queer theory”, compared to the number of factory workers anxious about  making ends meet on eleven dollars an hour or the number of waitresses  who have been shocked by a the suicide of a neighbor whose mortgage was  foreclosed or the number of farmers who are worried about a friend whose son is hooked on prescription painkillers. It appears that white  working class North Carolinians saw the cultural concerns of the  national Democratic party as defining deviancy down coupled with a worse than indifferent attitude toward a large and downwardly mobile segment  of the population: rural and small town America. If we replace  transgender issues with the question of normalizing relations with Cuba, then mutatis mutandis it can be seen how the Democrats lost Florida. It is a mistake to take “Hispanics” as forming a monolithic bloc. Cubans  are not Mexicans are not Puerto Ricans are not El Salvadorans. An  unexpectedly large Trump turnout in South Florida’s Cuban community  combined with a larger than usual turnout in the rural, Republican,  panhandle turned the state to Trump. Moreover, it is worth remembering  that Trump, the archetypical crass, arrogant, plutocratic New Yorker who doesn’t know one end of a cow from the other, won Iowa. Iowa. People  who work in cornfields voted for the candidate who made billions in  urban real estate. Inside the beltway types who are now in denial and  looking for someone to blame must look to themselves, not the hoi  polloi.

In order to appreciate the rage of the white working  class in the last election, try a thought experiment. Imagine the case  of a coal miner’s son outside Paducah who worked hard in some crappy  backwoods high school and got a scholarship to the University of  Kentucky or an unemployed sheet metal worker’s daughter from Youngstown  who made the best of the underperforming local schools and got into Ohio State. They are the first in the family to get a higher education.  These are deeply disadvantaged people who bucked the odds and are trying to make something of themselves. They are pursuing their version of the American Dream. At the start of their freshman year, they attend  compulsory “sensitivity and diversity” gatherings run by the  administrative enforcers of political correctness on campus. They are  told peremptorily that they are racists imbued with “white privilege”.  If they deny the reigning verities they are targeted for social  ostracism and political reeducation by their bien pensant betters. To  complete the now mandatory ritual self abasement, they are forced to  atone for their sins by first publicly acknowledging, then publicly  disowning, their “white privilege”, as it is identified by leftist  campus apparatchiks who are professionally indignant.

When they  visit home and inform their family that they are regarded by social  justice warriors as “privileged” and that because of that, various  racial set asides and preferences at school don’t apply to them, the  family may well conclude that people with college degrees and secure  jobs know nothing of their actual circumstances and prospects. When they tell their families about the demand for trigger warnings and safe  spaces, the danger of microagressions and the inability of people like  them to speak about commonplace beliefs that are nothing unusual off  campus, the culture shock and resentment reverberates. Just because blue collar whites have few advantages does not mean they lack self respect  or pride. Nor are they lacking in anger. When Trump reviled “political  correctness” he struck a chord among a mass of marginalized,  underprivileged, precariously employed whites. Their support of Trump  was a scornful rebuke to those people who drive Priuses and shop at  Whole Foods and blame the white underclass for far too much of what ails victimized minorities.

I must admit that I too have been guilty  of refusal to listen to Trump supporters, viewing them as NASCAR  watching troglodytes too benighted to be worth serious discussion. I  gave up on them because I thought them impervious to reason. This was a  bad mistake. Trump voters were so demonized that some of them were  driven underground by the avalanche of contempt that buried those who  refused to support the consensus candidate of America’s white collar,  college educated elite. This is the only possible explanation for why  the polls that showed Clinton comfortably ahead were consistently off by a few percent, undercounting Trump, particularly in the battleground  states of the Rust Belt. The same phenomenon occurred during the Brexit  vote. Our public discussion has become too bitter and vituperative when  people feel constrained to hide their real opinions. Civility broke down and free speech was curtailed. I’m at fault here as much as anyone. If  responsible politicians do not respond to the reasonable complaints of  America’s white working class, irresponsible politicians will.

We  do not have clean hands and we should have known better. The American  elites who dismissed and disdained the demagogic orange messiah are at  least as culpable as the resentful, desperate plebians who could not  tell that his promises were as phony as his suntan. Trumpism is the cri  de Coeur of Walmart shoppers whose Burger King paychecks are unable to  cover the increased insurance premiums demanded by the “Affordable” Care Act. With unselfconscious irony, in the pursuit of “inclusion” elites  have all but expelled blue collar white males from the Democratic party. But that is not all: Trump won white working class women who were more  disgusted by Clinton than Trump. In the name of “diversity” elites have  demanded lockstep ideological conformity. The traihson de clercs is all  too real and we are now paying a heavy price.

Going forward, we  will find out how robust America’s system of checks and balances is. One takeaway from this election is that multiculturalism has failed. We  must recognize that Trumpism is the dialectical inverse, the  doppleganger to the leftist identity politics so comfortably embraced by credentialed elites. We must reconnect with the reasonable,  constructive center of American politics. I will be part of a loyal  opposition attempting to, at the very least, freeze out the Alt-Right,  racist, anti-semitic, nativist, fascist, white nationalist, neo-nazi,  tin foil hat conspiranoia crowd that have been emboldened by Trump. I  have a new appreciation of the virtues of limited government. I also  have the advantage of low expectations. I will regard myself as  successful if Trump turns out to be America’s Berlesconi rather than  it’s Mussolini.

Pundits must get beyond the saccharine,  self-justifying, self deception that Trump was elected by an unholy  alliance of retirees and rednecks. We are all complicit in the triumph  of Trump and it is time to face that fact. Highly advantaged Americans  of both parties have replaced the old motto of “E Pluribus Unum” with  “Where’s Mine?”. Somehow we lost sight of the Common Good and treated  politics as a zero sum game. Finding general interests in a mutually  beneficial political order is imperative. We must revive and pursue an  idea of the Common Good if we are to have any chance of overcoming the  tribalism and grievance mongering of contemporary politics. This is our  last, best hope in the age of Trump.
