---
title: Contra Harari
subtitle: From my posthumous works, a history of the World
date: 2021-10-03
src: https://michaelsugrue.substack.com/p/contra-harari
---

THE STATE OF THE ART.

The modern study of world history has gone through three stages. 

The first stage began during the era of WWI. Roughly a century ago scholars began to produce histories of world civilizations.  These studies  focused on the independent development of disparate  culture/civilizations, searching for their unifying principles and  life-cycles. The two most influential practitioners were Arnold Toynbee  and Oswald Spengler. They drew a very broad readership because they  combined their scholarship with a concern among the western readers for  the future of their own culture/civilization, a future that many  perceived to be in doubt. Spengler’s Decline of the West first published in 1918, second volume 1923) was a pessimistic cri de coeur from a  German intellectual that diagnosed a dying civilization and attributed  cultural weariness, creative bankruptcy and self-destructive politics  not just to Germany but in the West as a whole. 

Toynbee’s massive twelve volume A Study of History, (1934 to 1961) treated world  historical civilizations as independent organisms that follow a  universal pattern of “life” from genesis to disintegration. He argued  that in every civilization, a “creative minority” enabled their  civilization to respond to the challenges posed by environment,  geography and outsider peoples. The rise, efflorescence, and  ossification of these “creative minorities” contained within them the  fate of their civilizations. Both Spengler and Toynbee were the  spokesmen for historically traumatized peoples whose cultures had been  battered by the mutual suicide pact of the World Wars. These world  historians were especially influential among mid twentieth century  Europeans because they addressed the anxiety about the future, the  crisis of confidence and the spiritual malaise that resulted from the  irredeemable self-immolation of the World Wars.

In the second half of the twentieth-century a new generation of scholars re-engaged with  the study of world history. Unlike the first wave, these authors  defocalized individual civilizations or culture zones, and instead  examined how large scale natural or interactive patterns worked across  time and space to change the human condition, sometimes in ways that had little or nothing to do with nations and kingdoms or civilizations.   The French Annales school pioneered in examination of history during the “longue duree” a period of time covering centuries rather than years  and large geographical areas that combined various political or cultural domains rather than discrete civilizations. The initiator of this  school, Fernand Braudel, showed in his book The Mediterranean (1949) how regardless of religion or political community, the Mediterranean basin  formed a single zone of exchange and culture over an extended run of  centuries from the late medieval through the early modern period. His  Capitalism and Material Life 1400-1800 (1967) examined the change in  wealth during the transition of feudalism to capitalism and how this  gradually modified everyday life. The Annales school focused on long  term processes rather than political events, whole populations rather  than individuals. They led to a new level of abstraction in historical  writing. Braudel’s History of Civilizations (1995), focused on the  almost imperceptible effect of how large scale elements like technology, climate and environment shaped daily life as well as precipitating  prominent historical events. 

Philip Curtin showed in Cross  Cultural Trade in World History  (1984) how trade created a mutually  beneficial commerce in ideas that was far more influential than the mere commerce in goods. Carrying his analysis from the ancient river valley  civilizations to modernity, he shows how portable human ingenuity is and how advantageous it is for every culture not to have to re-invent the  wheel. Intercultural exchange is shown to be a positive sum game. In the Rise and Fall of the Plantation Complex, (1990) Curtin showed how a  vastly extended period of cross-cultural trade effectively created an  “Atlantic Sphere” uniting Africa, the America’s, and the Western  European littoral over a period of centuries. Curtin’s final work, The  World and the West (2000) covers the trajectory of Western expansion  dominance and decline over the last 500 years, with examples drawn from  not just from the west but from Siam, Ghana, Japan, Buganda, Indonesia  and the Ottoman Empire as well.

William McNeill’s The Rise of the  West (1963) was a result of a ten year project: a comprehensive history  of the origins of Western civilization. Once a civilizational backwater, McNeill traced in great detail the world historical connections that  eventually made the West the dominant power that it has been for the  last five centuries. Explicitly intended as a response to Spengler’s  Decline, McNeill offers a far more optimistic account of the convergence of the disparate strands of world history into a global narrative.  McNeill also wrote what is arguably the most important history book of  the twentieth century. In Plagues and Peoples (1976) he created a  groundbreaking, comprehensive account of all the major epidemic diseases globally from the beginning of recorded history to the present. He  managed to plot the European Black Death (usually treated in isolation  by specialists) from its initial outbreak in India through its  transmission along trade routes to China, Central Asia, the Middle East, Africa and finally Europe. He also did the same for other epidemic  diseases, which was an immense project. This analysis gave him a  powerful tool to explain the European destruction of the Mesoamerican  civilizations: Old World microbes that the inhabitants of the Americas  had no resistance to created mass death far beyond what Conquistadors  could have done with mere gunpowder. McNeill’s breakthrough was to  decisively connect natural science with social science by bringing  biology and history together. 

McNeill was my teacher in college  at the University of Chicago, Curtin was the department chairman who  hired me for my first job out of graduate school at Johns Hopkins. This  second wave of works have received immense academic acclaim, but have  not had much impact beyond the scholarly community. This is largely  because they are rather erudite and “academic” in their orientation and, unlike the first wave, they do not try to directly respond to ongoing  concerns in the broader culture.

The third wave of world history  addresses concerns prominent in early twenty-first century civilization: environment, technology and the acceleration of historical change in a  globalized world. This third wave draws on the second by assessing  natural and “material” influences or readings of history, but does so in a way that directly, if narrowly, connects to contemporary anxieties.  Jared Diamond has argued in Guns, Germs and Steel (1997) that Spain was  able to colonize and conquer New World civilizations because the  east-west axial alignment of Eurasia gave its Civilizations a vast  advantage in terms of biological and epidemiological diversity. The  explicit purpose of Diamond’s intervention was, of course, to show that  it was NOT racial superiority that led to Europe’s advantage, and that  the imperialist pretensions of the West that were based on that presumed superiority are indefensible. In Diamond’s work Collapse (2005),  Diamond examined a varied collection of historical peoples, from  Greenland to Easter Island, whose culture drove them to an avoidable  extinction caused by environmental collapse. Cultural dysfunction  combined with a failure to meet the challenges of environmental  degradation on small scales portended a global environmental catastrophe in the twenty-first century.

Even more recently the work of Yuval Harari, Sapiens (2011), has embedded world history within a vastly  larger natural history of the universe.  Drawing on current science and  technology, he argues that human history develops as Homo Sapiens learn  to master their environment through science and cooperate through the  “imaginary” solidarities elicited by an socially constructed cultural  fictions. By harnessing energy, humans replicate their kind throughout  the planet.  In his subsequent volume, Homo Deus (2016) Harari  speculates about the technological transformation of human beings, or at least some human beings, into immortal, unimaginably powerful gods.  Calling upon work by “transhumanists” and “posthumanists” connected with cybernetics and genetic engineering, Harari describes a possible future state where humanism is superseded by a “techno-humanism” and culture  is subsumed by the worship of Data. The terminus of history is described as the emergence, within the forseeable future, of a technologically  enhanced race of superhumans who are elements in a universal flow of  divinized data.

This work will draw on all three of these  traditions. The second and third wave are critically important for  showing how natural and social processes and interactions have  conditioned the development of human history on a global scale, and how  such processes form a sort of matrix within which humans must operate.  Central to this has been an appreciation of the importance of science  and scientific knowledge in the realm of historical development. This  book shares this orientation, but argues that it does not go far enough  in so far as science itself is part of human culture, and is subject to  the same changes over time and place as all things human. Inevitably a  dialectic emerges between natural science and social science. As human  communities learn more about the world around them, they inevitably  learn more about themselves: the knower and the known cannot be fully  disentangled. Self is created by circumstance and vice versa. New  understandings of the natural create new understandings of the human.  The humanities are not abolished but transformed. The knower and the  known are locked in a cycle of question and answer. New answers to the  question “Where am I?” (embedded in Nature) always modifies and refines  the question “Who am I?” (a conscious human being) which in turn  provokes new questions about Nature in a endless cycle of reciprocal  development. Natural Science and Social Science are conceptual Siamese  Twins that cannot be separated. The modification and persistence of the  human might be called (in Plato’s sense) “the law of conservation of  music”. 

By treating culture as part of the human “ecology” it  hopes to reintegrate the symbolic structures dealt with in the first  wave with the purportedly more “material” elements in the second and  third.  Indeed, this project works on the assumption that as sentient  beings humans cannot exist as fully human, much less “civilized,”  historical beings without a cultural environment that produces shared  meanings, purposes, and values that allow for large scale human  sociability, cooperation, and flourishing. The apogee of every culture  distinguishes the sacred from the profane. Consciousness is neither an  illusion nor is it less real than Nature. This is not to deny the  importance of scientific knowledge and interpretation, but rather to  historicize it. In fact, the central conceit of this book will be that  world history is largely conditioned by changes in our civilized  understanding of nature and its processes, and that this understanding  is part and parcel of our larger cultural horizons.

INTELLECTUAL CONTEXT

A heightened deployment of irony is always a sign that a cultural trend  is dying. Socrates and Euripides, ironists par excellence, are  symptomatic of the fact that the Athenian golden age was ending. These  two ironists are alien to the outlook of Pericles and Aeschylus. The end of the Middle Ages was also marked by a conspicuous efflorescence of  irony. William of Ockham’s nominalism ironically implied that Aquinas’  scholastic synthesis was a waste of time. Chaucer highlighted the ironic moral bankruptcy of medieval Christianity in among other things, the  Pardoner’s Tale. Finally, Cervantes was the Sancho Panza of Spain’s  belated end to the Middle Ages. The waning of the Enlightenment was also marked with an ironic acknowledgement that Reason had been oversold. It did not solve the all the problems of human life, as optimists like  Leibniz hoped it would. Rousseau’s Discourse on the Arts and Sciences  indicts the Age of Reason as an age of corrupt self-deception.  At  roughly the same time, Voltaire’s Candide marks the pessimistic  rejection of reason as insufficient to justify the stubborn persistence  of suffering in the world. He waves the white flag with “We must live  without philosophizing, it is the only way that makes life bearable”. 

Both our high and low culture are saturated in irony, which means the  vultures have begin circling our dying postmodernism. My favorite idiot  savants, the Sex Pistols, are the demotic prophets of postmodernism.  “Pretty Vacant” is the final end of the Nietzschean astheticism touted  by Joyce in Prortrait of the Artist as a Young Man. The bridge between  them is the Horst Wessel Lied. Wittgenstein once made the apt  observation that “most philosophical diseases are caused by an  unbalanced diet of examples.” So it is with us. Consider a book like  Foucault’s Discipline and Punish. The examples he chooses, largely drawn from marginal institutions like prisons and madhouses, are intended to  afflict the reader with the same misanthropic delirium that  characterized his life and death. In his melodramatic cultural  pessimism, the abnormal is normalized and the prosaic rhythms of  everyday life are reimagined as a Hieronymous Bosch painting, The Garden of Earthly Delights. The stances he took, such as reducing justice to  the advantage of the stronger and the lust for power as an end in itself may seem new but in fact are ancient temptations. For all of their  cleverness, the irony embraced by the postmodernism of Rorty and Derrida and Foucault worships its own mortality. Universities have become what  Sloterdjik called “rage banks”, where professors of the hard sciences  who churn out world historical technological advances coexist uneasily  among professors of the soft sciences who are permanently outraged,  allegedly about “oppression” and “marginalization” but in fact about  their own irrelevance. Universities have become the Jurassic Park of  dead ideas, where failed 19th century like ideologies like Marxism still walk the earth. The impish pomo paradox that all ideas are paradoxical  grows stale and boring, impotent and increasingly sterile. This trahison de clercs amounts to a collective death wish, a cultural masochism  which Houellebecq so aptly satirized in his novel Submission. The  Nietzschean aestheticism implicit in the antinomian moral nihilism of  postmodernism was especially evident in the remarks of the Nietzschean  composer Karl-Heinz Stockhausen, when he enthusiastically described the  9/11 attacks as “the greatest work of art imaginable for the whole  cosmos”. 

The rise of Big History is a decisive signal that  postmodernism is dying. Big History is, after all a series of the  “totalizing metadiscourses” that postmodern writers like Lyotard declare to be impossible. Postmodernism never had an affirmative program, it  was always negation without responsibility, an aesthetic of repudiation.  It was an intellectual fungus growing on the fallen redwoods of the  Enlightenment. Now this intellectual parasite has consumed its host it  is starving to death because it is running out of things to negate. It  moves along currently with a kind of intellectual inertia, propelled by  the momentum of intellectual second and third stringers oblivious to the fact that the Zeitgeist has abandoned them.

Harari’s two most  recent books are a bellwether of this cultural change. Harari’s “Big  History” called Species, starts at the origin of the universe with the  Big Bang and ends peering into the near future. Harari’s sequel, Homo  Deus is a paean to humanity’s self- deification which plots a trajectory for the future, where Data will become a religion and mere humanity  will be rendered obsolete and then eliminated. To call these books  ambitious does not do them proper credit, they are in fact, prophetic.  They are counterfeit theology. These books have had immense commercial  success, making the New York Times’ bestseller lists, and they have been particularly influential among the transhumanists and posthumanists of  Silicon Valley, who are intent on going beyond the boundaries of the  merely human. Harari’s appeal to the techno-elite is as much to their  vanity as to their aspirations: it is twenty-first century scientistic  hybris on steroids. These are intrepid books, replete with sharp  insights informed by an intellectual toughmindedness that does not  recoil from danger or disappointment. 

Harari’s books are also  deeply flawed. His attempt at naturalistic reduction fails because it is solipsistic. It is incoherent because it implicitly contradicts the  politics and ethics that animate so much of his work. 

Everyone  has gaps in their reading. In addition to reading history, Harari also  seems to have read much science fiction, futurist speculation like that  of Nick Bostrom  and transhumanist writers like Ray Kurzweil. I am  fortunate in that my gaps do not overlap Harari’s. Wittgenstein and  Kierkegaard, Plato and Descartes, Collingwood and Rawls, literature and  religious texts have influenced my thinking but are noticeably missing  in Harari.

Harari’s work revolves around a reductive account of  reality which breaks the universe into three domains: permutations of  matter in spacetime, which are objectively real, intersubjective  constructs like money or law or ethics which are ephemeral, socially  sustained illusions, and subjective experience, the least real of all,  which is slated to be abolished eventually by being absorbed into  physics, and until then is grudgingly acknowledged as reality’s poorest  relative. In his first volume, Sapiens, Harari has chosen to be  humanity’s Sancho Panza, relieving us of our many numinous illusions and inviting us to inhabit an all too dispiriting and unflattering new  reality. He informs us, for example, “Human equality” is a myth and  later we will find out that human value is too. Harari often paints with a roller rather than a fine camel’s hair brush. We are informed in  Species for example, that “…laws, justice, human rights…” are all too  human illusions, and that “…none of these things exists outside the  stories people invent and tell one another. There are no gods in the  universe, no nations, no money, no human rights, no laws and no justice  outside the common imagination of human beings.” Given humanity’s  predeliction for cruel self-deception, in some ways, Harari’s eventual  abolition of humanity is a relief.

Harari’s naturalism articulates the great prejudice of our age. It seems not to need justification, but this is not so because it is reflexively incoherent. The science  worshipping claim that only nature is real is not itself derived from  natural science, it is the ontology and metaphysics of a faux religion.  Inevitably the Epicurean intellectual tradition represented by Harari is forced to reduce good and evil into pleasure and pain. This inevitably  leads to Huxley’s Brave New World as an ideal type of society, which  Harari uneasily admits. If on the other hand, there exists anything  worth suffering for, then Brave New World is a dystopia and Mr. Savage’s choice to hang himself while pathetic, is understandable.

The dubious elements of Harari’s work are as large as the topics he chooses. 

There is a pervasive, Rousseauian “Noble Savagism”, as where Harari argues  that paleolithic hunter gatherers were better off than various  sedentary, civilized alternatives. His account of mathematics as an  imaginary construction cannot account for the very suspicious uniformity of allegedly “imaginary” entities like the theorem of Pythagoras among  societies completely separated in space and time. Cultures that do not  independently “imagine” identical funeral ceremonies or creation myths  or seafood recipes do “imagine” identical arithmetic. These flaws, while important, are far less important that some others. Harari’s Big  History has big problems. Only the most ambitious work can have problems on this scale. Bracketing these smaller difficulties, which are large  enough to constitute fatal flaws in any ordinary sized history, it is  worth considering some of the big problems in these two books.

The first is his differential deployment of skepticism and dogmatism.

Harari is mostly a naturalistic eliminative materialist in his claims about  the world, except when his enthusiasms get the better of him, in which  case he is alternatively oracular and dogmatic. At some times, Harari  takes the posture of a gnostic archon disclosing prophetic insights  unknown to the uninitiated. For example, we are informed about the true  nature of human felicity “…people are made happy by one thing and one  thing only-pleasant sensations in their bodies.” We are never informed  what set of “objective” sense data could be provided for such  intellectual desk pounding. Is it descriptive? Has he conducted a survey of our species? Is it normative? Is this what we ought to be made happy by? And this despite his claim that all “ought” claims are socially  constructed figments of our collective imagination? Are those who deny  that happiness is coextensive with pleasure doing happiness wrong? What  might that mean? Harari’s dogma about happiness is not, by his own  standards, a claim about the “real” world. It is in fact a declaration  of the metaphysics that informs his hedonism, exactly the kind of claim  that he scoffs at in others.

Is human sacrifice immoral? The  Aztecs and Carthaginians didn’t feel that way. The Romans decorated the  Appian Way with thousands of crucified slaves after crushing the  rebellion of Spartacus. Is this in bad taste? The Romans didn’t think  so. I am at a loss to understand how biology or any other natural  science can contribute in any way to resolving the disagreement between  Spartacus’ slaves and the Roman legionaries. Most people in most places  during most of the historical past had no qualms about slavery. If  Rousseau, who Harari quotes with approval, is right that “What I feel  good-is good. What I feel to be bad- is bad” then it is hard to  understand, given the plurality of human feeling, how ethics could ever  be anything but an individual or collective whimsicality. What is there  to talk about? Some people would like to diminish the aggregate amount  of suffering in the world, others would not, still others are  indifferent. Neither the firing of pain synapses nor the firing of  pleasure synapses has any moral valence if his claims about “reality”  are true. In his own terms, this is merely electricity that Harari feels sentimental about, which of course is itself just more electricity,  improbably elevated to the status of a new Golden Calf.

Harari  moves briskly. The illusion of human freedom is eliminated and then five pages later, so is the illusion of determinism. Lesser explorers would  find an impasse. One might think that the nonexistence of both freedom  and determination would leave no excluded middle. Harari, invoking  chaos, holds up for our contemplation the modal verbs and their ethereal domain, the subjunctive mood; what could of, would of, or should have  happened, what might have been but wasn’t. History he tells us, is  chaotic, which means, “so many forces are at work and their interactions are so complex that extremely small variations in the strength of  forces and the way they interact produce huge differences in outcomes”  This is a very interesting fact, and no doubt in the mind of God an  infinite number of very interesting simulations can be run, indicating  just how catastrophic the flapping of butterfly wings can be. But it is  worth remembering, however ruefully, that we inhabit exactly one  universe and however many multiverses may otherwise exist for minds that are utterly unlike our own, all we have is this one noncounterfactual  reality. Harari seems to think that invoking chaos solves the old  historical problem of freedom and determinism. In fact it does not even  address the problem, much less does it solve it.  Potentials are not  actual. Imagining what would or could or might have happened in any or  every hypothetical modality, does not make any of these imaginary  modalities real. Nor does it release humanity from the causal mechanism  intrinsic to our conceptualization of nature and Harari’s denial of  freedom. Nor do these potentials alter in any way this one universe that we do have. Harari is forced into this improbable series of mental  gyrations for the same reason his intellectual predecessor, Lucretius,  was forced to introduce the idea of the “Swerve” into his account of the world. Only the most overt and dubious kind of special pleading can  save a purely naturalistic account of history from collapsing into  deterministic fatalism. 

Harari informs us of the purpose of  studying history, which is metaphorically, to “widen our horizons” is  literally “to understand that our present situation is neither natural  nor inevitable”. Since Harari claims that the physical world is the only reality, it is hard to understand how he could claim that “our present  situation” or anything else could be anything other than natural.  According to Harari we make no free choices and nothing is real except  the one nature we happen to be trapped in. It is hard to follow why we  should be heartened by the subjunctive tautological fact about chaos  that if things were different, they would not be the same. Any  skepticism sufficiently robust to eliminate metaphysics inevitably  eliminates mind in the process, but the “I” that affirms or denies such  skepticism refuses to disappear. Even the strident fulminations and  dogged naturalism of Daniel Dennett is addressed to readers who are  conscious and able to change their minds on the basis of reasoned  argument.

The second is Harari’s elimination of the human.

The current state of our culture is a mess because we do not know who we  are. We have lost sight of the human. As Nietzsche wrote in the Use and  Abuse of History “…eventually the universal historian finds himself in  the living slime.” This is the hidden reason why Harari and others do  not distinguish between prehistory and history. It will no doubt come as a great surprise to anthropologists that they are practitioners of a  science that has no subject matter. Moreover, it may be that some of his readers believe themselves to be human beings, and they may be daunted  by the intimation that they are ontologically indistinguishable from  plankton or moon dust. This abolition of the human is symptomatic of a  larger problem. Like Odysseus’ son Telemachus, we don’t know who we are  and we are searching for ourselves.

In history graduate school,  way back in the twentieth century, we were taught that history is not  merely the past, rather it is human actions in past time. A universal  history that is genuinely historical is the resume of our species, not a book about everything that has ever happened. Harari has lost the human in nature, so he begins his history at the Big Bang. However, the rise  of pterodactyls and trilobites and the Cretaceous die off of the  dinosaurs are not historical, they are simply past events. In history,  unlike natural science, we still explain events teleologically,  attributing purpose and reason to human decisions, as Collingwood  pointed out. Caesar had his reasons for crossing the Rubicon and because he had a particular set of purposes in mind, which are essential to  understanding his actions, historians try to explain those reasons. We  eliminated teleology from our account of natural science centuries ago,  and nobody asks anymore what purpose the moon has for orbiting the earth or speculates about the intentions that ancient fishes may have had  when the left the water and wriggled onto dry land. Harari and some  others seem to think that there is nothing specific to human beings that distinguishes them separately from nature, but we explain human action  very differently from the way we explain physical events, because people make choices and do things for reasons and are responsible for their  conduct, which is why the Nuremberg Trials did not accept the Nazis’  excuse that they were only following orders. Doubtless, in explaining  the assassination of Abraham Lincoln, no credible historian will deny  that the equation f=ma describes the motion of the bullet from the  assassin’s pistol, but nobody would inquire as to the intentions that  the bullet had for killing the president nor would they describe the  slug as good or evil, justified or not. Yet, we do ask exactly those  questions and make exactly those judgments about the intentions of John  Wilkes Booth, and we cannot help but deploy different kinds of  explanations for the assassin and his bullet. Harari’s intellectual  stance has serious weaknesses, many of which are related to his  reductively naturalistic understanding of human nature. 

Harari is unflinching in his appraisals of maligned historical actors and  tendencies. He makes apologies for socialism despite the continued  unpopularity of Stalin and for evolutionary humanism, despite the fact  that he finds Hitler distasteful. He is fairminded toward the Nazis,  when he observes, approvingly, that their “evolutionary humanism” is  ‘”the only humanist sect that has broken free of traditional  monotheism”. He is correct and he is brave to say so in print. He states that Auschwitz is a “blood red warning sign rather than as a black  curtain that hides entire sections of the human horizon.”  Harari  affirms the assumptions of the Nazis ”evolutionary humanism” but at the  same time has inexplicable moral reservations. But why so squeamish? If  he is right and there are no moral facts, just perspectives derived from equally imaginary “religions” and “moralities”, what are we being  warned about? Why should anyone care whether imaginary entities like  justice, (however defined, either by the Nazis or their victims) prevail in history if all such social constructions are equally unreal? Why  should we prefer mermaids to unicorns or vice versa if both are equally  imaginary things, sustained only arbitrary social conventions? If Nazis  take one stance toward Auschwitz and Liberals another and there is no  objective arbiter between their disagreements about these imaginary  things, then there is no good or evil, just winners and losers. If  Harari’s claims about “reality” are right, Auschwitz is to be disparaged because the Nazis lost, not because there is anything immoral there  that requires a warning. Despite all the ubermenschlich posturing, he  never convinces himself of his moral nihilism, much less his readers. He is torn on the rock of contradictory intellectual impulses that he  cannot explain or control. He affirms the cultural assumptions of these  evolutionary humanists, but never explains why it might be improper to  impose a final solution on problem of wasting scarce resources on  enemies, inferiors and defectives. Harari says that the triumph of  “evolutionary humanism” is splitting humans into biological castes but  is curiously reluctant to speculate what the coming triumph of the Eloi  over the Morlocks will look like.

One of the most attractive  qualities of Harari is that he personally is in fact a far better human  being than his theories would suggest.  He states “religion is a deal,  whereas spirituality is a journey”. It requires no great insight to see  that Harari is on that spiritual journey, is lost, and cannot find home. He movingly writes of his travels, “Academic studies might be  transformed into a spiritual journey if the big questions you encounter  deflect you towards unexpected destinations, of which you could hardly  even conceive at first”. Yet his disappointment is palpable. He is a  despairing Odysseus, unable to find home, who settles for the island of  the Lotus Eaters as a poor second best substitute for Ithaca. 

He  takes intersubjective “imaginary” things that are socially constructed,  cultural artifacts such as religion and money and moral rules, to be  arbitrary, existing only in the minds of those who believe in them,  otherwise not real. Yet inexplicably, his book is everywhere larded with Harari’s moral enthusiasms. He repeatedly inveighs in favor of animal  rights, treating factory farming as morally abhorrent without ever  explaining why he or his reader or anyone else should prefer the firing  of some neurons rather than others. Harari also editorializes against  the oppression of socially stigmatized individuals, for example  homosexuals, without explaining why the oppression of marginalized  individuals “ought” to be anything but a matter of the greatest  conceivable indifference to his readers, like any other empirical fact,  say the number of craters on the moon. He clearly believes at some level that oppressing humans and mistreating animals is wrong, and that we  should stop such practices. I think he is correct. However he is a  divided man: he is attempting to claim at the same time that the moral  obligations he invokes are unreal. As Kierkegaard said, Either/Or.

Harari’s irrepressible editorializing and his ubiquitous and otherwise  inexplicable moral dicta can only be embarrassed about their purportedly imaginary ontological status. At some level, he does not believe the  skeptical, reductive materialistic claims that make his history appear  so shiny and contemporary and new. If he really believed what he claims  to believe, the repeated moral non sequiturs would have fallen before  the editors’ blue pencil very early on. The posture of getting beyond  the “illusion” of moral obligation is a bluff. Nobody does because  nobody can. The Enlightenment mirage of perfect clarity is the most  seductive myth of all. Harari advocates sympathy for no reason he can  explain, and persists in condemning the oppression of people and the ill treatment of animals and yet simultaneously pretends that he thinks it  makes no difference in the face of meaningless cosmic indifference. Nor  will some kind of a sentimental Existentialist “authentic” “commitment”  help him. This self indulgent river of treacle is left over Romanticism  still being sold long after its expiration date. I cannot think of any  reason to believe Pol Pot inauthentic and I am confident that Adolph  Eichman was committed to his particular project, but I am at a loss to  understand why I should care, much less approve. This problem of  simultaneously affirming and denying moral reality is everywhere in  these two volumes. We are informed that “there is no justice in history” and then four pages later we are told that “Unfortunately, complex  human societies seem to require imagined hierarchies and unjust  discrimination”. I cannot tell what meaning could possibly be attached  to a term like “unjust” in light of the alleged nonexistence of justice, and the claim that it is “unfortunate” would seem to summon with the  left hand the spectres he so recently banished with the right. Harari,  to his credit, seems to think sympathy a virtue, despite all the  nihilistic tough guy posturing. 

What Harari takes, he often  restores. He notes that “…we must answer questions such as What is more  important? And What is good? And these are not scientific questions.  Science can explain what exists in the world, how things work, and what  might be in the future. By definition, it has no pretentions to knowing  what should be in the future. Only religions and ideologies seek to  answer such questions.” Of course, because Harari insists that neither  religions nor ideologies describe reality, it is not clear how to  proceed. Happiness, which we have already been told is the firing of  certain synapses and neurons, is redescribed by Harari as “seeing one’s  life in its entirety as meaningful and worthwhile”. But regrettably, on  the same page, we find that “any meaning that people ascribe to their  lives is just a delusion.” Harari is a new Prometheus broken on the rock of an adamantine theory.

The third problem is his failed account of subjective consciousness, or mind.

Harari concedes that there exists no robust reductive account of the existence of subjectivity, but he promises one soon, which eliminative  materialists have been promising for centuries. Unfortunately,  behaviorism is all we have left after psychology gets a shave from  Ockham’s Razor. The reductive naturalistic empiricism sometimes called  “Scientism” which averts its eyes or dismisses thought that does not  resolve itself into empirical questions of physics or deductive  questions of logic, such as ethics, aesthetics or the philosophy of  mind, pretty much died out with the Vienna Circle in the mid 20th  century, undone by its own hybris. Except for a few later rearguard  actions by the disinherited children of Carnap, like the Churchlands, or the New Atheists, or Harari, this scientism could not live up to its  own hype. The more strident the scientism, the clearer it becomes that  they are smuggling in ontological dogmas that are neither self evident  nor scientifically warranted. 

Consciousness refuses to go away,  and this is an unresolved, in fact unresolvable, problem for Harari. He  notes that “…there is zero scientific evidence that in contrast to pigs, Sapiens have souls”. This is true, but there is also zero scientific  evidence that there exist “other minds”, yet people have found this  archaic belief a hard habit to break, perhaps because universe gets  somewhat lonely without them. The belief in other minds is no less an  archaic, unscientific myth than the belief in souls, as any behaviorist  psychologist will tell you. Yes, both people and animals cry out if  struck, but there is no need to attribute this to any residual ghost in  the machine. As Descartes noted, all of animal behavior can be simply  and exhaustively explained as a mechanical response to outside stimuli.  He interpreted animals as automata, which they clearly enough are.  Amoebas move away from light because that is what they do, not because  their “mental state” is averse to light. Descartes saw that he had no  need to posit any anima animating any animals, such assumptions are  shorn away by Ockham’s Razor because there is no need to propagate a  special hypothesis like mind when a simpler and equally effective  stimulus/response account exists. Of course, Descartes tried mightily to establish a Sonderstellung for human beings, by attributing to them,  freedom and rationality, which amounted to a soul, but this too was a  scientific failure. There is zero scientific evidence that either  animals or humans have either minds or souls. What scientific grounds  can there be for abolishing souls but keeping minds? None. Harari is  arguing for a distinction without a difference because he feels  sentimental about his quadruped friends, and wants people to stop being  mean to them. There is much to say for this proposal, cruelty to animals is an evil, but this is an extremely improbable way to justify such a  claim, and alas, it does not adequately address my sentimental  attachments to other, human, bipeds. 

Harari claims that mind is  very different from soul, because it is a “flow of subjective  experiences”, but he never explains how he, or anyone else, could ever  get scientific access to the alleged “flow of subjective experiences”  going on in pigs or for that matter, other people. Proxies like  electrical brain activity will not serve as satisfactory stand ins,  because of course we then have only the objective experiences of the  behavior resulting from the alleged experiences of others, no  observation at all of their hypothetical “subjective flows”. Nor do we  have any need to hypothesize any subjective component in either human or animal behavior, as Hobbes pointed out centuries ago. I believe that  people have minds, and I also believe that other people are conscious in roughly the same way I am, but I cannot claim any scientific warrant  for these beliefs. Behavioral psychologists are correct, and a reductive scientific materialism will eliminate not merely the soul but the mind  as well. Lucky for me, I think science isn’t everything. Unluckily for  Harari, he claims to believe that it is.

Harari acknowledges that  “science knows surprisingly little about mind and consciousness.” The  “hard problem” of consciousness remains unbreakable because qualia  resist external observation. I suspect that this is connected to the  fact that no one has yet had anyone else’s experiences. Still worse,  there is no prospect of anyone having anyone else’s experiences in the  future, however distant. Then “why not just discard mind?” as has been  done with the soul, Harari asks.   He seems to think mind ineliminable,  not just his mind but all minds. He argues that “when I step on a nail I can be 100% certain that I feel pain” but here Wittgenstein’s objection to the “certainty” of private experiences on the ground of non vacuous  contrast is relevant. We can be certain of the theorem of Pythagoras  because it is possible to doubt it. Certainty and doubt are correlative  concepts, like north and south or odd and even. Certainty can exist only where doubt can exist, and if it is impossible to doubt that one has a  particular sensation, such as pain, the claim of “certainty” about this  pain being indubitable is both vacuous and otiose. 

Even worse,  there is no ground for any claim about anyone else’s sensations. If in  fact there are such things, as I and most other people believe, science  cannot tell us about them. Harari laments that “few ethical dilemmas can be solved by referring strictly to brain activities.”  but is not  forthcoming as to what those few ethical dilemmas might be. Harari wants very much to avoid solipsism and credit human claims that they are  conscious, which is understandable, but this requires the selective  withholding of the corrosive skepticism he deploys so readily on things  he doesn’t like. 

It is clear that he is getting desperate when he proposes to correlate the claims about other minds with certain  patterns of electrical discharge in the brain, and thus to justify the  claims that humans are conscious, by pointing to these electrical  discharges, but the vacuity and circularity of this presupposing of what is being proved is absolutely hopeless, and he knows it. All patterns  of electrical discharge are evidence for is patterns of electrical  discharge. They tell us no more about “mental states” than about the  activities of the Holy Spirit. Harari notes that it might be possible to delete mind, consciousness and subjective experience altogether, but  notes that this destroys ethics and politics. However, it is not clear  why we need to hold onto what he claims are ephemeral socially  constructed myths. After all, he claims that acknowledging the existence of other minds is merely a “social and legal convention”. 

Eventually he just gives up and rhetorically waves the white flag. Unable to make  any progress on a reductive physical account of consciousness, the best  he can do is an appeal to authority telling us that eminent scientists  at Cambridge have recently declared that animals are conscious.  Alas,  he neglects to explain how any collection of scientists could legislate  the allegedly “objective” fact of animals’ “subjective” experiences into existence any more effectively or with any more authority than say, the Council of Trent could.

Harari informs us that “In essence, we  humans are not that different from rats, dogs, dolphins and  chimpanzees.” (Homo Deus p.128) but he has spent quite of bit of space  explaining that humans do not have an essence, and he goes on to state  that we must not be prevented from “…understanding and valuing other  animals on their terms”. I value dogs, I like them and don’t approve of  being cruel to them, but I have no idea what “terms” dogs use to “value  themselves”, whatever that means. I am equally baffled by his  inclination to take the self “valuations” of dogs, whatever these may  turn out to be, seriously, when Harari has gone at such lengths to  render unsustainable the valuations that the vast majority of humans  deploy about themselves. 

Harari states that there is no reason to believe in the sacredness of human beings but this is only a specific  application of his more general abolition of the sacredness of  everything else.  How does “value” survive but “sacredness” succumb? It  is rather like the persistence of mind and the abolition of soul. He  likes the former and dislikes the latter. He states “All large scale  human cooperation is based on imagined orders.” But he gives no  indication why he is so much harder on some imagined orders, say God,  but much easier on others, like the “minds” of rats. The differential  deployment of his eliminative skepticism is one of the most curious  aspects of his book. Reality emerges in Homo Deus as a kind of topiary,  which has been trimmed extravagantly to suit the author’s enthusiasms.  The value of dolphins is vindicated, but the value of human beings is an imaginary construction, doomed to disappear. He allows that the  humanities “…emphasize the crucial importance of intersubjective  entities, which cannot be reduced to hormones and neurons”, yet he  simultaneously insists that “intersubjective entities” are not real but  imaginary, which reflexively entails the implication that his  ontological division of reality into the objective, subjective and  intersubjective, is not “real” either. Despite the fact that he implies  that these categories are not real entities, Harari is simultaneously  very keen to insist upon the reality of intersubjective items like his  tripartite ontological distinctions, without which his argument  collapses.

Fourth, Harari does a poor job of integrating human  culture, particularly myth, religion and literature into his  techno-centric vision of the world.

Everywhere from the equator to the poles, every human society has a set of stories with which they  categorize their experiences, soothe their all too human premonitions of death, and manipulate nature. Narrative starts out explaining small  scale local phenomena, but over time these stories accumulate and they  are revised and connected. These larger stories eventually become the  particular province of the aged, who become the transmitters of  collective memory through oral traditions. The original stratification  of society emerges in the distinction between the wisdom of age and the  longing for intelligibility among the youth. The gods and the ancestors, the pains of the present and the fears of the future are all rendered  coherent and less threatening in the stories of a divinized past, which  define the lives of both the individuals who hear them and the groups of people that tell them. 

Even the folktales of primitive hunter  gathering bands are pregnant with an entire cosmology that is elaborated over time in response to the inquiries of the rising generation. What  is the world? Who am I? Who are we? These are the permanent questions of the human condition. Every mythic tradition creates the meaning of  human life, which makes the human predicament, poised on the knife’s  edge of ephemeral existence, bearable because it is valuable. Pain is  assuaged, the changeable is fixed, the uncertain rendered  comprehensible, and our destiny is foretold in every cultural narrative, no matter how simple or complex. Myth is cognitive and  ineliminable.This thin fabric of ideas is our only insulation against  the immensity of nature and the terror of history.

An eminent  theologian, Schliermacher, once wrote, “God is Man’s Idea of himself”.  This is a powerful truth: at the very minimum, the religion of a people  is, if nothing else, the collective self-understanding of that people  coded into stories. All polytheism, like all politics, is local. In  every human society, nature cults were constituted featuring spooks and  spirits and polytheistic pantheons, unique to their localities and to  the peoples that created them. These religions were also the locus of  art and knowledge. They were the cult in culture. Other peoples, in  other places were understood to have their own gods. Simultaneously,  these peoples were constituting the collective self conception of their  local band or tribe or nation in creating their particular religion.  Religion articulates the social self, a collective identity in  distinction to all other tribes and their deities. Indeed, the  persistence of these gods is a placeholder for the persistence of these  peoples.

The emergence of a universal God signals the birth of a  unified humanity. No longer local but universal, no longer one among  many, no longer anthropomorphic and fallible, capricious and flawed, the one God is a covert constitution of the unity of the human race, beyond the accidents of time and space. The Egyptian Pharaoh Akhenaten’s  stroke of genius in creating the first monotheism lies in the implicit  acknowledgement of one human species which was beholden to Ra, the  unique, benevolent, indispensible Sun. One unitary God entails one  unitary humanity. The Egyptian priests destroyed Akhenaten’s  contribution to world history, but the monotheistic insight was taken up and elaborated by renegade Egyptian slaves, the Hebrews. In welding  themselves, individually and collectively to the One, the only God, the  Hebrews contributed a permanent legacy to the cultural patrimony of the  world. One God means one human species with a shared destiny, a shared  providence, bound together by one set of universal moral rules. 

These universal moral rules are understood to be accessible to all, on  account of reason, independent of revelation. In Genesis, Cain is  presumed guilty of murder when he killed his brother Abel, despite the  fact that God does not reveal the Fifth Commandment until Exodus, the  next book. When the prophet Nathan indicts King David with the  accusation, “You are the man” the universality of YHWH’s moral law in  insisted upon. By the time of the Babylonian Captivity and the  rebuilding of the temple, the prophets, despite the fact that they are  chosen men within a chosen people, begin to sound uncompromisingly  Kantian in their universalism. The early condemnation of the Canaanites  and Philistines in the book of Joshua morphs into a blessing upon all  nations, as YHWH reveals Himself in time.  “Blessed be Egypt my people,  and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance.” (Isaiah  2:4,19:25). Universal moral rules are the precondition for the words  that the gospel attributed to the angels at the Nativity, “Peace on  earth, good will to men”. The universal peace heralded by Isaiah when he anticipates that swords shall be beaten into plowshares and spears into pruning hooks is a signal contribution to the moral vision of the  world, unthinkable in the Greco-Roman tradition. As a prophet is to the  Chosen People, the Chosen People are to humanity. One universal God  means one universal humanity means one universal moral law, means one  universal providence. The Old Testament is in fact an epic poem with a  collective subject: the Chosen People.

Plato, the greatest and  most versatile intellect in the Western tradition, is best understood as more a poet than a philosopher and perhaps more a prophet than either.  In the Republic Plato resurrects the imagery of the ancient river valley solar cults and fuses it with Greek rationalism. Plato is the Akhenaten of reason, a Moses who eschews revelation from Burning Bushes or  anything else because he takes dictation from the Logos. Plato invented  rational monotheism. The Form of the Good, which is an improvement on  YHWH in that it is never angry or jealous or anthropomorphized in any  way, is the Logos, the God of Reason. The Form of the Good is an  immobile crystal of perfection, changeless and eternal, that somehow  generates intelligibility, truth and value in the human world. Plato  intends to replace the worship of Homer’s capricious, immoral and  irrational Olympians with the worship of the Form of the Good: a  monotheism beyond revelation. His Philosopher/King is a high priest and  his Guardians are a priesthood. Even later when Plato’s thought changes, the symbolism of the sun as perfect goodness does not. This is why in  Plato’s last dialogue, the Laws, Plato’s ideal city turns out to be an  immense solar calendar, where every inhabitant and every action is  referenced to the cycles of the sun.

Christianity continued the  Greek/Hebrew monotheistic universalization of moral rules for humanity,  bringing the sun’s fire down to earth in the Pentecost. Each disciple  was gifted with the ability to understand and be understood in every  language. This monotheistic gift of the Logos, symbolized by tongues of  fire over the disciples heads’, means that there exists a substratum of  moral reality, identical in every language, applicable equally to all  people, which is to be spread to all. The New Testament is also an epic  that is written not for or about some particular people but for and  about our entire species. In the New Testament, as in all other epics,  various hero stories (Jesus, but also Paul, Stephen, John the Baptist,  Peter etc.) are connected by the evangelists and epistle writers to  create a unified narrative; the collective story of universal  redemption. When Jesus preached repentance of and forgiveness for sin,  he assumed that hearers would respond to his call because they knew, not by revelation, but by natural reason, that they were morally guilty. As Justin Martyr argued very early in the history of Christianity, the  Christian message assumes rather than contradicts the recognition of  rationally discovered moral rules, applicable to all, prior to and  independent of revelation.

Harari is capable of extremely acute  readings of important texts and he does not hesitate to draw very  incisive inferences from big ideas. His is a very sharp intellect with  great aspirations. This is what makes his misunderstanding of epic so  surprising. He states, “Greco-Roman epics and medieval chivalric  romances were catalogues of heroic deeds, not feelings”… “Crucially, the heroes did not undergo any significant process of inner changes” (Homo  Deus 239). This is a weak misreading. The Greek epics tell us exactly  the opposite. As the first line tells us, the Iliad is about the “wrath  of Achilles”, the poem ends, not with the Trojan Horse and the  destruction of the city (which is a flashback reserved for the Odyssey), but with Achilles’ unanticipated pity for Priam, the bereaved father of Hector. Moreover, in the Odyssey, when Odysseus goes to the underworld, he encounters the shade of Achilles, who ruefully regrets the heroic  pursuit of fame. Odysseus takes both a physical and a spiritual journey, from the vainglorious boast to Cyclops, to the improved  self-understanding he bestows upon his son Telemachus after the killing  of the suitors, “It is unholy to vaunt over the bodies of the dead.”  Odysseus reestablishes the sacred, purifying his city and himself and  his son. Plato’s ironic epic, (the Dialogues taken collectively), is  replete with psychological insights and closes with laughter and tears  which reveal the psychic states of his new, improved Homeric hero as  well as the spiritual desolation of Socrates’ lesser companions. A  further revelation of the psyche is evident in the Aeneas’ affirmation  of pietas in Virgil’s literate Roman epic. Harari not only  misunderstands epic, he also fails to see the ubiquity of the living  epic tradition and never seems to suspect that it is lurking in  monotheist scripture or historical writing or in the new artistic forms  of modernity, the novel and film. 

Thus Harari does not recognize  that epic is both archaic and contemporary, the permanently reinvented  ur form of literary expression. He lacks the Delphic self-knowledge to  see that he is both an epic hero and an epic poet. Like Telemachus as  the beginning of the Odyssey, he does not know who he is. All of today’s epic poets, the historical deifiers of humanity, are singing the same  old song. Harari seems to believe that he is doing something new and  unprecedented with his self-divinizing, technology worshipping  speculations, as all the apocalyptic transhumanists do. In fact he is  recapitulating something archaic, the foundational myths of Athens and  Jerusalem. Prometheus stole the fire of the gods and took solace in the  fact that the Olympians were doomed. In Genesis the snake tempts Eve  with the prospect of “becoming like God” by eating the forbidden fruit.  This Abolition of God/Human Self Divinization schtick has been done  before and done better.  Comte eliminated God and elected himself Pope  of the new “Religion of Humanity”.  Marx cut off at the source the  “opium of the masses” and then, like the Old Testament prophet he was,  announced that he, a pseudo-secular Moses, could lead the “Species  Being” of Humanity to the Promised Land of an apocalyptic abolition of  all injustice. Nietzsche pointed out that God was dead and shortly  thereafter wrote a new scripture, Thus Spake Zarathustra. After his  literary Deicide, Nietzsche raised God from the dead, as everybody else  who has ever killed God does. Nietzsche became the John the Baptist of a new immanence worshipping religion, to be realized with the arrival of  an earthly God, the Ubermensch. 

According to Harari, Liberalism  is morphing into a brave new world of “immortality, bliss and divinity”: an optimistic redescription of Aldous Huxley’s description of the  future. Yet Harari has not counted on the reappearance of that tendency  in human nature represented by Huxley’s Mr. Savage, (Homo Deus p. 276).  Mr. Savage may hang himself and wish to destroy the culture that caused  his anomie. Harari is insouciant about the loss of meaning in human  life, but this is catastrophic because it removes the last reason to  exist. Ubermenschlich “Homo Deus” would succumb to what the ancients  called taedium vitae, a comprehensive ennui. Harari has not adequately  considered the Buddha’s insight that existence itself is painful. Nor  has he digested Kierkegaard’s desperate insight that a life of Epicurean pleasure is both vacuous and most importantly, terminally boring. As  Kierkegaard insists in Either/Or, those Epicureans with two digit IQs  live a bovine existence chewing the cud endlessly until they die. They  are minimally human. The late Hugh Hefner was a good example, an  octogenarian who never tired of bedding twenty year old women, yet did  not have the wit to find himself or his hobby tedious. Our current deal  making, skirt chasing President is another prime example. In contrast to such spiritual plebians, creative artists have a heightened need for  transcendence. If they fail to find it they gravitate toward dangerous  second best substitutes like narcotics. This is why very creative people are so often very self destructive people. Without access to religious  transcendence, those Epicureans with three digit IQs, inevitably descend into an intolerable state of terminal boredom (as people as various as  Vincent Van Gogh, Virginia Woolf, Amy Winehouse, Sylvia Plath or Ernest  Hemingway could testify). As the front man for Nirvana, Curt Cobain,  wrote in “All Apologies”, prior to blowing his brains out, “I wish I was like you, easily amused…”. Curt Cobain died of boredom.

Comte,  Marx, Nietzsche and the rest of humanity’s divinizers just couldn’t help themselves. Neither can Harari. The pattern never varies. It is grimly  predictable. As soon as God gets demoted from His primary position,  whatever had been second in importance, (human beings in most cases),  gets an unexpected and risibly incongruous promotion. Humanity as God is amusing at best, like watching children playing dress up in their  parents clothing. However, Harari’s ubermenschlich project of  self-divinization is extremely dangerous. There are unanticipated  monsters within. This Nietzschean project is the apotheosis of Athenian  rationalism, an explicitly inegalitarian, rationalistic tradition that  nonetheless directs strong passions for its ends. Like the Nazis’  derivative “evolutionary humanism” (which also dismisses Jerusalem as  alien to Aryan warriors) it is derived from the Athenian tradition and  harnesses naturalistic assumptions to powerful emotions. If it is  pursued in the contemporary world, it will result in an ocean of  innocent blood. I must confess that I have some sympathy for humanity’s  immense self-imposed misery that Nietzsche and his admirers would  distain. Monotheistic pessimism about human nature is validated on every page of every history and on every day’s evening news. Five hundred  years ago human beings were fully capable of enslaving and exterminating whole continents, as the European conquest of the New World shows. We  are right now perfectly capable of doing the same on a planetary scale.  If you think that people are naturally good and that human depravity has improved in the last five centuries, you are in the grip of the most  absolute and dangerous kind of self-deception. What Kant called the  “crooked timber of humanity” will not become straight anytime soon. As  always, the poets see what is coming before the scholars. Consider the  late, great, Leonard Cohen’s prescient song, “The Future”.  http://genius.com/Leonard-cohen-the-future-lyrics. The last shred of the Enlightenment died at Auschwitz. Man as God will end even worse.

I believe that Harari is wrong. Meaning cannot to be dispensed with. Nor  is it unreal. He is operating under its spell when he makes moral  judgments he cannot justify but feels compelled to make anyway. People  need meaning more than air.  If they do not find it they twist  themselves into astonishing spiritual contortions and intellectual  paradoxes. Their frustrated instincts inevitably seek some distant  second best satisfaction. Moral order cannot be avoided or dismissed  because it is built into thinking and speaking itself. As Habermas has  argued, rationality itself contains moral imperatives. Being reasonable  is not simply one option among many, it is a rational, moral obligation. Yet the apogee of reason, as Euripides pointed out, is for reason to  encounter and recognize its own limits.

In every world historical  civilization, folktales get grouped together and heterogeneous stories  are twisted together like fibers in a rope to form an epic. Heroes whose actions represent the collective that spins these yarns get named,  customs and rituals are validated and the inevitable anguish of human  life is rendered bearable. Prior to the separation of art, religion and  philosophy into separate activities, a tale of tales emerges which is a  cultural encyclopedia and the high point of science 1.0. This is epic  poetry. Epic is the ur literature, spontaneously generated in all of the largest and most temporally expansive of the world cultures. Various  poems such as the Hindu epic of India, the Mahabarata; the Christian  epic of Western Europe, the Song of the Cid; the Islamic epic of West  Africa, the Sundiata and technological epic of contemporary America,  Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey, all tell the same story.

All of  epic literature is actually only one story, which is what Joyce was  gesturing at in Finnegan’s Wake with HCE. Without ever becoming trite,  it is always the same story with the same hero: the personification of  “us”. The structure does not vary: 1) Dissatisfaction with life, 2)  Search for the valuable, 3) A journey with initiatory ordeals, 4) An  ending with a homecoming that reveals the triumph of the sacred. This is true of all the epics from Gilgamesh through Star Wars. Even when epic  is apparently dispensed with as a dead form, it continues to erupt back  into human consciousness, changing only the externals, that which is  bigger paradoxically emerging from something smaller, like a snake  shedding its skin.

Plato toils mightily to kill off the Homeric  epic in the Republic. However, he simultaneously writes a new ironic  Iliad and a new ironic Odyssey, an immense parody of the Homeric poems  which taken together are called the “Platonic Dialogues”.  Plato, the  greatest of the Greek poets, couldn’t help himself. Ironically, Socrates is simultaneously a new, improved Achilles and a new improved Odysseus. Athens is the new Troy and Heaven his new Ithaca. Homer’s story of  Greeks destroying a great city is retold, except that in Plato’s  retelling, the Greeks fighting to destroy the city are ironically  working from the inside out rather than from the outside in. Socrates is a new, improved Achilles, an invincible warrior of the mind rather than the body. Socrates is the intellectual slayer of men. 

Odysseus,  the wily sojourner impeded by monsters which must be overcome in order  to reach home, eventually restores moral order by killing the suitors  and restoring Ithaca. Socrates, who never leaves Athens except when  compelled by military obligation, is, ironically, always on a journey.  The same Homeric journey motif holds the frame scenes of the greatest  dialogues together thematically (Republic, Protagoras, Symposium,  Phaedrus, etc.) all of which begin with Socrates in motion. He is on a  spiritual, rather than a physical journey and he never swerves off  course, even at the price of his life, which is the underlying meaning  of the Crito with its discussion of escape from prison as taking the  wrong path. He will fight monsters as Odysseus did, but ironically these are spiritual rather than physical monsters and ironically he can do  his fighting at home. Always on his way somewhere yet never going  anywhere, Socrates waits patiently in Athens, ironically affirming that  the spiritual monsters will come to him. The new Cyclops, the new Circe, the new version of the tempting Sirens are sophists and politicians and poets. Socrates’ homecoming is not to Ithaca but to Heaven to commune  with the gods, as is says in his death dialogue, the Phaedo. Just before the hemlock kills him, Socrates walks around in circles while preparing for death because walking in circles getting ready to die is the emblem of the philosophical life. He completes his journey by going home to  the gods rather than Penelope.

It is not controversial that  archaic and medieval societies produced epics, but the form did not die  quietly. The last great epic in English is usually regarded as Paradise  Lost. Because of the devastation caused by the Wars of Religion, German  speaking countries got to the Enlightenment late, so last great epic in  Western tradition is in German, generally agreed to be Goethe’s Faust.  Epic seems to become a dead form after the advent of science 3.n. But  epic hibernates, and emerges transformed in the novel and in film and in Big History. 

The novel form sooner or later reverts back into  epic as the greatest writers realize the potential latent within it, as  Lukacs noted. Sooner, in the case of the first great novel in English,  Robinson Crusoe, which is an allegory of world history. Crusoe is the  Enlightenment Everyman who goes through all the phases of human history  sequentially until he at last freed of the Island, which is Nature. The  Enlightenment Hero, Robinson Crusoe, is the personification of the  Cartesian Cogito in Nature (the Island) with Lockean politics added  (Natural Rights plus Labor Theory Of Value). Ontogeny recapitulates  phylogeny. The whole history of humanity is represented in Crusoe’s  life, from the earliest attempts to control nature to the Enlightenment  encounter with brown skinned natives, most of whom are represented as  cannibals who are righteously killed. The one surviving good native  gratefully expresses a spontaneous wish to become Crusoe’s servant.  Friday asks about natural theodicy, Crusoe cannot answer, but extends  religious toleration to the Catholic Spaniard that eventually is  marooned on the island. Robinson Crusoe is the Enlightenment’s fictive  world history in microcosm.

Eventually, the epic potential of the  novel is realized in the omniscient narrator of War and Peace, who is  God, and the novel comes to an end but not to a conclusion because the  ongoing story is the open ended yet providential tale of all human  experience. Tolstoy was an ill-disguised epic poet, as were Joyce and  Mann. Stephen Daedelus informs us at the end of Portrait, “I go on to  encounter reality for the millionth time, and to forge within the smithy of my soul the uncreated conscience of my race.” It is no accident that Ulysses is homage to Homer. Buck Mulligan, like HCE in Finnegan’s Wake, is every human being and has every human experience. Thomas Mann’s  rewriting of the Faust story in Doktor Faustus is simultaneously and  indictment of the Nazis and homage to Goethe but it is also a  reaffirmation of the living epic tradition.

Contemporary  practitioners of “Big History” are also epic poets, disguised as history professors, pretending to be above antique holdovers like moral  judgment and voluntarily restricting themselves to “real” rather than  invented people and events. They are telling the story of how human  beings got into their current predicament, and the pattern is the same  as in all other epics. Dissatisfaction with life, search for the  valuable, a journey with initiatory ordeals, ending with a homecoming  which signals the triumph of the sacred. Their dissatisfaction varies  with the writer, Diamond is dissatisfied with the triumphalism of  Western modernity, Harari is dissatisfied with cruelty and mortality. I  am dissatisfied with the violation of the Delphic injunctions by these  epic accounts of the human experience: these writers are excessive and  they do not know themselves. They are on a search for the valuable: a  victory of humility and fraternity for Diamond, the Ithaca of painless  immortality for Harari, Delphic self-knowledge and a sense of proportion for me. For all Big Historians, history is the journey through time and space with initiatory ordeals. For Diamond, the homecoming is the  recognition that our vaunted superiority is a series of accidents and  the sacred is the equalizing recognition that Western Civilization was  lucky, not good. For Harari, the homecoming is the recognition that God  is dead and meaning died with Him, but, amusingly, the sacred triumphs  when Harari divinizes Big Data and promotes posthumanity to the status  of immortal god. For me, we come home and re-cognize ourselves with an  affirmation of a global humanity, both individual and collective, that  shares a common reason and universal moral constraints, a common value, a common planet and a common destiny. 

Finally, Harari seems  committed to an individualistic account of history until the very end of his second volume, when he transmutes humanity into a divine data flow, a pleroma of silicon. 

Scientists often treat social animals as  collective superorganisms. Bees are not solitary, they form hives with a complex division of labor. The same is true of ants. Humans are social  animals like bees or ants but we distinctively have minds and make  choices. We are capable of doing things for reasons, not simply on  account of instinct. English has no direct analog of the German idea of  collective subject. Our consciousness is social and constituted in the  process of communication. As Wittgenstein points out, there can be no  private language. One of Heidegger’s oracular musings is apt, “we –  mankind -- are a conversation”. The nebulous, spooky thing that Emerson  called “the Oversoul” is realized concretely in what Habermas called  “the pragmatics of communicative action.” It is the unity of what  Saussure called langue and parole. There is no meaning without  community. The current American political conflict between Alt-Right  Populism and Alt-Left Identity Politics are two plants with the same  root: a frustrated longing for the community that is the precondition of meaning. What if the emergence of a collective human subject continues  unabated despite these clashes? What if the internet is the emerging  central nervous system of a new kind of collective human animal?

Harari does not deploy the German idea of collective subjectivity until the  very end of his second book, Homo Deus. He is constrained by the  fragmentary and ephemeral life of the individual. Hegel gets it right.  There is one immense human subject, a superorganism in biological terms: the human species. (See biologist E.O. Wilson’s groundbreaking work on  ants to see how profitable this superorganism idea can be in natural  science. William McNeill, in his groundbreaking work, The Pursuit of  Power, described ruling elites who extracted tribute from subordinate  populations using the threat of military force, as “macroparasites” that feed off a collective host. This was a half step in the direction of  viewing history as a domain of collective subjects.

This idea will seem very farfetched to some readers, and in fact there are many  conceptual difficulties with the idea of consciousness, subjectivity and mind. There are many problems associated with the belief in a psyche,  as behaviorist psychologists in the tradition of Pavlov, Watson and  Skinner have argued at great length. The list of conceptual difficulties associated with subjective mental life would fill a small library.  Philosophers have strongly criticized mind/body dualism as well. Yet  despite the fact that there are a profusion of problems with the idea of individual human subjectivity, nearly everyone gravitates towards the  idea that there is “somebody home” in their bodies and the bodies of  others, human and animal. Let us bracket these problems of individual  subjectivity for the time being. However many problems may be urged on  the attribution of collective mentality and agency to our entire species and even to other species, these problems are no more daunting than  attributing them to individual humans, which we do habitually. 

The motion of schools of baitfish avoiding predators and flocks of  migrating birds and other social animals in herds create complex,  dynamic patterns that are not observable by any organisms in the group.  These patterns are the byproduct of the individual specimens’ reacting  to local stimuli without any one of the specimens choosing the general  pattern that the collective manifests. Human history is similar in that  there exist patterns that are observable in the behavior of human  societies over historical time that are neither intended nor understood  by the individual historical agents. Hegel called this, “the cunning of  history”. Hegel and Marx were the first to identify the patterns of  social transformation that emerge in history and attribute them to  something like a “hive mind” that is more than the sum if it’s  constituent human individuals. The idea of a collective subjectivity is  no more intrinsically problematic that the attribution of consciousness  to individuals. If you find the one plausible, there are no added  conceptual difficulties in affirming the other. This idea may strike  many Anglophone readers, whose cultural traditions are committed on so  many levels to individualism, as extravagant, but in the German  intellectual tradition the idea of collective subjectivity is neither  new nor outlandish. Kant’s famous Categorical Imperative, a universal  moral rule binding upon every rational agent, was understood by Kant to  apply to all individual persons (including God and the Angels), but it  also applied equally to collective subjects, like nations. This is why  Kant’s legalistic admirer, Woodrow Wilson, took Kant’s idea of a League  of Nations, a rationally obligatory moral norm, as binding absolutely  upon all nations, including the United States. The League of Nations was to be to the global community of collective subjects what the social  contract was to lawless individuals in the state of nature, an absolute  moral obligation demanded by rationality itself. 

Hegel viewed the history of the world as a stage where collective subjects, nations,  sequentially played their parts in the development of a universal  collective subject. He went beyond the state as rational agent to a  universal swide collective subject composed of smaller collective  subjects, nations. This lies behind his philosophy of history and the  Phenomenology of Geist. Nor does the development of this concept end  with Hegel. 

Marx had a problem within his determinate laws of  historical development. He needed some kind of voluntarism to make  revolutionary practice possible. After all, if the global proletarian  revolution is inevitable, why should I or anybody else bother? In the  absence of an afterlife, why would anyone give his life for the  Revolution that was coming anyway that they would not live to see? Marx  addressed these problems by positing a “Species Being”, a universal  collective subject in which all individual humanity participated. This  was an attempt to create a material rather a spiritual version of the  Hegelian Geist. In the twentieth century some German speaking thinkers  working on the philosophy of mind introduced some dramatic new ideas, as in the case of Freud’s positing of the formerly unknown “unconscious”  mind. It was unavoidable that sooner or later this idea of a  subconscious in the individual psyche would be expanded to fit a  collective rather than an individual mind. Explaining the evidence for  and operations of this posited “collective unconscious” was the life  work of C.G. Jung. 

I have no idea whether there exists a  “collective” unconscious, but I suspect the Germans have contributed  something important in positing a collective subjectivity. The  individual human being is an integral entity but is also a homunculus  contained within an immensely larger being. The history of the world is  the Bildungsroman of this collective psyche’s coming of age, an epic  journey toward knowledge of self and circumstance, consciousness and  nature. A global history of the changing understanding of the natural  world is in fact a disguised history of human self-understanding. As we  come to know that which is Other, which is one unified thing, Nature, we cannot avoid coming to know the Knower, ourselves, better. History is  this ongoing reciprocal dialectic. We ask two unavoidable questions,  “Where am I?” and “Who am I?”. The answers to these questions  necessarily provokes new questions, about both the knower and the known. 

As the self conception of humanity changes, inevitably this  provokes us to ask new questions about nature, which produces new human  self understanding, in an ongoing dialectical back and forth. This is  the core meaning of Hegel’s Phenomenology of Geist, after all the  impenetrable metaphysical lingo and ponderous, barely intelligible 19th  century German philosophical verbiage is removed. This idea is  disconcerting, to say the least. However, he thing I find most  disconcerting about Hegel, is that he is right. Recently I was rereading Nietzsche’s Gay Science, a book I had translated from German for my own edification when I was twenty-two, fresh out of college. I noticed a  line I had previously disregarded in section 357.  Acute and brilliant  as he so often is, Nietzsche says “…without Hegel, there could have been no Darwin.”  This is a powerful insight.

All of the greatest  twentieth century world historians, like Curtin and McNeill, were  neo-Darwinians, which is perfectly understandable. McNeill’s Plagues and Peoples is arguably the greatest history book of the twentieth century, because he conclusively connects social and natural science, history  and biology. Twenty-first century “Big Historians” are the children of  Darwin also. However, in the community of historians, Hegel’s insights  generally are ignored and distained as nebulous Germanic mumbo-jumbo,  the nineteenth century’s analog of Pangloss’  “metaphysico-theologico-cosmononology”. Anyone who has read Hegel will  sympathize with this impatience.

Yet, at the very end of Homo  Deus, Harari goes full Hegelian. This is initially surprising but on  reflection makes sense. Our species’ goal is described through a  cybernetic lens: “…we may interpret the entire human species as a single data processing system, with individual humans serving as its chips. If so, we can understand the whole of history as a process of improving  the efficiency of this system…” Harari speculates that we are evolving  into a “cosmic data-processing system [that] would be like God. It will  be everywhere and will control everything and humans are destined to  merge into it.”  “As the global data-processing system becomes  all-knowing and all-powerful, so connecting to the system becomes the  source of all meaning.” This is nothing new. It is Teilhard’s de  Chardin’s Omega Point with a Silicon Jesus. It is literally the world’s  greatest deus ex machina.

What new adventures await the human  collective self? What will our next interrogation of nature reveal about the questioner? Harari’s eschatology is moving. He tells us that the  myth of human equality is coming to an end, and the reality of  technologically enhanced inequality is upon us. Harari also claims that  nothing so flimsy as love will save us. We are for better or worse  presiding over the end of our species. Harari describes homo sapiens as  “the animal that became a god”. Like Oscar Wilde, who quipped that  America had moved from barbarism to decadence with no intervening period of civilization, it seems that animals are now about become gods, with  hardly any intervening period of humanity.

Ancient Taoist  alchemists looking for the elixir of immortality stumbled upon  gunpowder. Harari, in his quest for painless immortality, is likewise  playing with dynamite. He asks at the very end of Species, “What is more dangerous and irresponsible than gods who don’t know what they want?”  The true answer might surprise him. Those who are dangerous and  irresponsible are not gods: no matter how much they flatter themselves,  they are human, all too human. And there is in fact something far more  dangerous and irresponsible than gods who don’t know what they want:  would be divinities that don’t know who they are.
