---
title: Consciousness in the Marxian Conception of History (1983)
subtitle: A Critical Schematization
date: 2021-08-04
author: Michael Sugrue
src: https://michaelsugrue.substack.com/p/consciousness-in-the-marxian-conception
---

“As I read on I discovered that the fellow made no use of mind, and  assigned to
it no causality for the order of the world, but adduced  causes like air and
ether and water and many other absurdi- ties . . .  That is why one person
surrounds the earth with a vortex, and so keeps  it in place by means of the
heavens, and another props it up on a  pedestal of air, as though it were a wide
platter”.

Socrates, Phaedo 98B-99B

The role of consciousness in history is a fundamen- tal problem for
contemporary Marxism, and this is largely attributable to Marx's  ambiguous
discussion of consciousness and its material concomitants. The per- sistent
tensions in Marx's work between consciousness and matter,  idealism and
materialism, have nuver been satisfactorily resolved,  despite Marx's
protestations of "consistent naturalism"1 and Althusser's attempted distinction
between the early and late Marx.1" Once this is  accepted," as Lichtheim
observes,

various pseudo problems fall by  the wayside, e.g. the question of "what Marx
really meant" . . . it can  be shown that in meaning different things at
different times (and  contradicting himself in the process) he was nonetheless
consistent in  strug- gling with a particular set of theoretical and practical
problems.1

The role of consciousness in history was such a  persistent problem for Marx,
and in addressing it he addressed a complex of related issues: knowledge and the
ideology/science distinction,  causality, ethics, method, verifiability and the
historical relationship between class structure/consciousness/conflict. Later
philosophers and  historians working in the Marxian tra- dition have extended
contradictory elements in Marx's treatment of consciousness in history  into two
general views, which will here be called the linear and the  circular.
Historical and philosophical criticism will be brought to bear on the two views
of consciousness as

21

 they appear in the practice of Marxian historians and philosophers.

Within Marx's writings, the "linear" view of con- sciousness is frequently
emphasized at the expense of the "circular," but neither position is  adopted
exclu- sively. Within the "linear" view, Marx "does not ex-  plain practice from
the idea, but explains the forma- tion of ideas from material practice."*
Consciousness is understood as a dependent  variable, a purely con- tingent
epiphenomenal reflex of material life.  Ideas, "those phantoms formed in the
human brain," are, in this  conception

necessarily sublimates of their material life process  which is empirically
verifiable and bound to material premises.  Morality, religion, meta- physics,
and all the rest of ideology and  their corresponding forms of consciousness no
longer retain their  semblance of independence . . . life is not determined by
consciousness, but con- sciousness by life.*

Passages such as this verge on  metaphysical monism by assigning ontological
primacy to an Absolute (in  this case, the "material life process," i.e.
matter), and then positing a relationship of linear, mechanical causality
between matter and  consciousness.'

The basic problem with this linear, strictly  materialist view of history is
that it is empirically falsified. History furnishes us with numerous occa- sions
in which a class behaves in a  manner directly contrary to its true material
interests, because of  certain ideas held by its members: the readiness of poor,
non-slaveholding Southern whites to fight for the Confederacy during the Civil
War is one example, and the willingness of the European working  class to fight
in World War I is another. More damaging still are those  instances in which an
idea, occurring in the mind of one individual,  radically alters the course of
history. In what way did Issac Newton's  objective relations to the means of
production determine his in-  tegration of mathematics and physics? And how
would European history  have developed had his ideas not been promulgated? When
the thought of  one individual can have such a decisive impact on the concrete
practice  of so many others, grave questiqns arise, not only for linear Marxist
materialism, but for any political science which purports to schematize  future
historical developments.

When Marx adopts a "cirular" view, material prac- tice is conceived of as
conditioning rather than deter-  mining consciousness, and the verb bedingen is
gen- erally used in  preference to the stronger bestimmen. The circular view
allows  consciousness a greater degree of autonomy, from material life'than the
linear. When

22

 Marx asserts that "it is quite immaterial  what con- sciousness starts to do on
 its own,"7 he ascribes to  consciousness a remarkable degree of latitude for
 inde- pendent action.  Marx does not articulate the circular view
 systematically, but much of  his work presupposes a substantial degree of
 autonomy for  consciousness.* To ascribe to consciousness any degree of
 autonomy from  material practice necessitates the invention of novel
 conceptions of  causality, whose unifying characteristic is ambiguity.'
 Consciousness  and matter, in this view, have an in(ter)determinate
 relationship,  except "in the last instance," when matter causally determines
 con-  sciousness. This point is repeatedly made by the later Engels writing
 against economic determinism.10

Regardless of whether material  practice determines or conditions social
consciousness, Marx generally  in- sists that there is an authentic distinction
between true and false  consciousness, or science and ideology.11 Marx
understood science as the theoretical reproductionoftherealworld,atheoretical
activity which  leads to truth, or practically adequate thought.12 Although Marx
does  not use the term ideology in a systematic fashion (Ideen, Anschauungen,
Doktrinen are used interchangeably with Ideologie), ideology is always a
pejorative term. Ideology may be thought of as necessarily false  thought in
defense of class interests, the "false consciousness of man  alien- ated from
himself by the division of labor."11 Within Marx's  conception of history,
during the interval between the initial division  of labor and the global
proletarian revolution, there must exist a  hierarchical

class structure of antagonistic producers and  exploiters.14 During periods of
social stasis, domi- nant ideas are  coextensive with the ideology of the ruling
class,18 while during  periods of social revolu- tion (when material productive
forces  contradict the relations of production) rival classes, each with its own
ideology, contend for supremacy.l* Class conflict retains an  ideological
dimension until after the revolution, when ideology will no  longer exist,
because alienation will no longer exist, because classes  will no longer exist.
Science will be realized. Man will be redeemed.17

Marx expects his assertions about history and class consciousness to be
persuasive because they are true, which is to say that his premises are
scientific and his assertions are the product of the empirical

.(inductive) method." This begs the question of how the validity of Marxian
empiricism and its premises may be determined. Marx appears to pull a
metaphysical rabbit out of his hat by asserting that the premises of his
empiricism authenticate themselves empirically.

The premises from which we begin are not arbi- trary ones, not dogmas, but real
premises from

23

 which abstraction can only be made in the imagination. They are the real
 individuals, their activity and the material conditions under which they live .
 . . These premises can thus be verified in a purely empirical  way.*'

This obscure passage seems to mean that when an obser- ver  is confronted with
Marx's premises ("real individuals") about concrete  human practice and their
verification, his organs of sense will indicate that they are literally,
obviously true. One assumes that this  demonstration will convince everyone
except those unfortunates born  without organs of sense and those whose
consciousness has been distorted by the ideology of their class. This variety of
philosophical desk-  pounding must strain the credulity of even the most
sympathetic reader.

Much of the inconsistency in Marx's conception of history stems from his use of
metaphorical speech.*' Three metaphors are essential to Marx's  conception of
history: "society is an organism;" "society is a  building;" "society is a
conversation."*1 The metaphor "society is an  organism" (which reflects the most
naturalistic elements in Marx) runs  throughout Marx's work, and many subsidiary
metaphors are closely  related (i.e. "reproduction" of social relations, social
"metabolism",  "life" of a society). This metaphor has won general acceptance
among  later philo- sophers and historians working in the Marxian tradition.

Marx's later interpreters have not achieved a sim- ilar consensus with regard
to Marx's other two metaphors. "Linear" Marxists emphasize that "society is a
building" while "circular" Marxists stress that metaphorically  "society is a
conversation."1* "Society is a building" is advocated by  linear Marxists,
because this "structure," when divided into an  "economic base" and an
"ideological superstructure," forcefully articu-  lates the primacy of matter
and the directly contingent status of  consciousness.21 This metaphor was ela-
borated into a monistic,  reductive, mechanical concep- tion of history by
Engels,** Plekhanov,**  and the theoreticians associated with the Second
International.*' The  events of World War I, in which the working classes of
each of the most  advanced capi- talist nations senselessly slaughtered each
other to  protect the interests of their respective ruling classes, brought many
of the shortcomings of linear Marxism to light.27 The linear Marxist  position
is also logically inseparable from ethical fatalism, which  undermines the
voluntarism necessary to revolutionary practice. For  these and other reasons,*'
circular Marxists, employing the metaphor  that "society is a conversation,11
became increasingly prominent, espe-  cially after the October Revolution.
Circular Marxists

24

 view society as an interdeterminative conversation between two contradictory
 yet interpenetrative ele- ments, consciousness and matter.2* This
 "dialectical" conception of society is essentially Hegelian, and it  allows
 consciousness a quasi-autonomous relationship with matter which  reflects its
 idealist origins. Most closely associated with this  circular, dialectical
 Marxism are Lukacs10 and Oramsci.11 Adherents of  the building and conversation
 metaphors interacted dialec- tically until shortly after the death of Lenin,
 when all theoretical contradictions  were practically su- blated and orthodoxy
 synthesized. Dialectical,  circu- larMarxismwas"negated,"anditschagrined
 spokesmen recanted their  errors publicly after the counterrevolu- tionary
 tendencies of their  opinions were empirically verified.12 Stalin's unification
 of theory and prac- tice determined rather than conditioned the short-
 circuiting of  interdeterminist Marxism in the U.S.S.R.

for the subsequent generation.11

Marxism's linear/circular, building/conversation
bifurcationwaselaboratedoutsidetheU.S.S.R. within the context of a  capitalist
class structure.14 Despite this circumstance, both linear and circular Marxists
insist that practically adequate thought like their  own is possible, while the
false consciousness that is an inevitable  concomitant of a society divided into
classes is to be found not only in "bourgeois ideology" but also, insidiously,
within the other, pseudo-  Marxism. The most formidable institutional bastions
of

linear  Marxism were the U.S. and European communist parties, whose
theoreticians unanimously affirmed the reductive, monocausal orthodoxy  into
which Soviet Marxism had ossified. After orthodoxy's death in 1953, linear
Marxism came under increasingly heavy ethical, methodological,  and
epistemological criticism. Linear Marxism retreated under these  attacks until
Louis Althusser discovered that the real Marx had been a  structuralist—a
breakthrough which enabled him to define such objections out of existence.11

Althusser endorses the defintion of  "structuralism" as an "ideology according
to which only the relations  between the elements (i.e., their places) in the
total- ity are  significant, and the occupants of those places are arbitrary."1'
This  latest and most sophisticated version of linear Marxism17 approaches the
relation between consciousness and matter by surrounding it with the  multitude
of all other relations that obtain in history, where perhaps  it will be lost in
the crowd. At any rate, it is rarely heard from  again: Althusser prefers to
focus on the totality of all relations, the  "structure of structures," rather
than examine any one of them.  Althusser asserts that history "is not a text in
which a voice (the  Logos) speaks, but the inaudible and illegible notation of
the effect of a structure of structures."1' Given chat "the whole existence of
the

25

 structure consists of its effects."1' Arthusser would like to understand "the
 determination of the elements of a structure, and the structural  relations
 between those elements, and all the effects of those  relations,

by the effectivity of that structure."*• The effects of the structure of
structures are determined (you guessed it) by a  "structural causality" in which
"the complex totality of a structure in  dominance is a structure of effects
with present-absent causes."*1  Causality might have remained forever mired in
the ter- minological  quicksand of Althusser's structuralism had not Balibar
(Althusser's  theoretical associate) provided the structure with some content: "
. . . the economy is determinant . . . ."**

"Consciousness" does not  merit extensive treatment, because Althusser believes
that "the concept  is conta- minated by the pre-Marxist ideology of the young
Marx."*'  There are, instead, two kinds of "knowledge effects," the scientific
and the ideological, which are distinguished by the "mechanisms" that cause them
("structurally," one would suppose).** Althusserian  structuralism's scientific
knowledge effect has the unique advantage of  verifying itself in an utterly
unimpeachable way: history does not  validate Theory, Theory validates
history.*1 This theoretical immunity  from criticism makes Theory the perfect
vehicle for legitimizing and  consolidating totalitarian political practice.*'
Althusserian  structuralism could and did serve to justify the ways of Stalin
(and  could equally well legitimize the reaction to Stalin supported by his
successors; the names change but the structure does not) to man.*'  Theory is
atheodicy.*'

Circular Marxism is an intrinsically  antinomian Weltanschauung which lacks the
monolithic unity of the linear conception. Yet the cicrular Marxists,** who
elaborated Gramsci and  Lukacs (after 1935, when Lukacs himself abondoned this
position) do  share a more or less unified set of theoretical concerns."
Circular  Marxism shows a preference for the early (Hegelian) Marx,11 emphasizes
that metaphorically, "society is a conversation,,,s2 is empirically  verified in
history," defines consciousness as an essential attribute of any concrete
historical class,** and attributes to con- sciousness a  (quasi, limited,
partial, relative, semi, incomplete) autonomy.8* The  advantage of this concep-
tion is that it creates the possibility of a  theory of ethics, and thus of
politics."

The fundamental  difficulty of circular Marxism is the "causal" relationship
bewteen  consciousness and matter in history.*" Matter causes consciousness,
con- sciousness causes matter; each causes the other, each causes itself.  This
causal relationship should not be mistaken for a form of necessity; still less
is it a form of contingency. It is neither contingent nor  necessary;
simultaneously, it " is both." The con-

26

 sciousness of any given class is determined by its ob- jective relation to the
 means of production, but the consciousness of the individuals composing  any
 given class is not; consciousness is determined in general, not in  specific.*'
 This causality is not a form of determination at all. It is  the comprehensive
 ambi- guity of Marx's conception of consciousness in  history, reified.

NOTES

'Except as noted, all references to  Marx refer hereafter to Robert Tucker, ed.,
The Marx Engels Reader (New  York, 1978, 2nd edition). The quote is from The

Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, p. 115.

'Louis Althusser, For Marx, trans. Ben Brewster (New York, 1969), p. 47 and
passim.

'George Lichtheim, From Marx to Hegel (New York, 1971), p. 81. Tliis approach
seems more sober and judi- cious than Agnes Heller's, for example: "Like every
other thinker of importance, he too refused to sacri- fice the  search for truth
in various directions and along various paths on the  altar of coherence . . .
the immortality, the living content of Marx's  thought

... isbasedprecisely on this brilliant lack of coherence." The Theory of Need in
Marx (New York, 1976), p. 87-88."

*Tucker, ed., The German Ideology, p. 164.

'Ibid., p. 154-155. It is, incidentally, a matter for speculatiaon what the
phrase "material premises" means. Out of what "material" would one  construct
premises? A materialist premise (if this is what is meant)  would not be
"empirically verifiable" because Marxian empiricism  presupposes the Marxian
materialism it would then presume to validate.

'Lichtheim argues that Marx did not endorse a reductive monocausal materialism
(From Marx to Hegel, p. 25), but Marx cannot be absolved entirely. There are
many passages from Marx that can legitimately be read as stating  that matter
determines consciousness. The German Ideology can certainly  be read this way:

ruling ideas are nothing more than the ideal  expres- sion of the dominant
material relationships, the domi- nant  material relationships grasped as
ideals." (Tucker, p. 172.) The  Introduction to the Preface to the Critique of
Political Economy is  similarly

27

 reductive: "It is not the consciousness of men that determines their being, but
 their social being that determines  their consciousness." (Ibid., p. 4.)

"Tucker, ed., The German Ideology, p. 159.

'This is the case, for example, when Marx states that while revolutionary  class
consciousness will necessarily be found among the proletarians, it "may of
course arise among other classes too, through the con-  templation of the
situation of this class." (Ibid., p. 193.) The idea  that some knowledge can be
obtained as a pure act of cognition apart  from the objective class position of
the knower is surely a departure  from the determinist conception of class
structure and class  consciousness, but it does explain Marx himself, who never
sold his  labor power for a wage.

'To acknowledge this difficulty and to  subsequently ignore it will not do. G.
A. Cohen, in Karl Marx's Theory  of History: A Defence (Princeton, 1978), p. 46,
dodges the issue in just this way.

"Tucker, ed., p. 762, EngeIs-J. Bloch, September 21,  1890: "Marx and I are
ourselves partly to blame for the fact that  younger people sometimes lay more
stress on the economic side than is  due it. We had to emphasize the main
principle vis ä vis our  adversaries, who denied it, and we had not always the
time, the place or the opportunity to allow the other elements involved in the
interaction to come into their rights."

"Although occasionally Marx lapses  into outright historicism and thus
epistemological relativism. For  example in Tucker, ed.. The Poverty of
Philosophy, p. 140: "...  men,whoproducetheir social relations in accordance
with their material  productivity, also produce ideas, categories, that is to
say the  abstract, ideal expression of these same social relations. Thus the
categories are no more eternal than the relations they express. They are
historical and transitory products." Can one consistently argue this  for the
ideas and categories of number, cause, time, space, matter?
ItisunderstandablethatMarxianhistoricism, and its implicit  epistemological
nihilism would make Althusser very upset, but it must be noted that his text
disrupts his overly neat distinction between the  early humanist Marx and the
later scientific Marx.

"See  thesecondThesisonFeuerbach,Tucker,ed., p. 144 for one clear statement"of
criterion for truth. See also Tucker, ed., Economic and Philosophical
Manuscripts of 1844, p. 91 for Marx's treatment of man "as an object of  natural
science."

28

 "Martin Seliger, The Marxist Conception of Ideology (London, 1977), p. 196.

""Hitherto, every form of society has been based as we have seen on the
antagonism  of oppressing and op- pressed classes." Tucker, ed., The Communist
Manifes- to, p. 483.

18"The ideas of the ruling class in every epoch are the ruling ideas." Tucker,
ed., The German Ideology, p. 172.

""In considering such transformations a distinc- tion should always be made
between the material trans- formation of the economic conditions of  production
which can be determined with the precision of natural  science, and the legal,
political, religious, aes- thetic, or  philosophic,—in short ideological forms
in which men become conscious of this conflict and fight it out." Tucker, ed..
Introduction to the  Critique of Political Economy, p. 5.

""This whole semblance, that  the rule of a certain class is only the rule of
certain ideas, comes to a natural end, of course, as soon as class rule in gen-
eral ceases to be the form in which society is organ- ized, that is to say, as
soon as it is no longer neces- sary to represent a particular interest as
general  or the general interest as ruling." Tucker, ed., The German Ideology,
p. 174.

"It must be emphasized that Marxian empiricism is a  metaphorical, not a literal
empiricism. If, for ex- ample, a historian  and a physicist were both to
"empirically" study the Declaration of  Independence, their methods would be
fundamentally different, and so  would their observations. When a historian
observes and analyzes a  historical text, is he using the same method as a
biochemist who  observes and analyzes blood? To take empiricism literally would
lead to  philosophi- cal behaviorism, which would make historical writing and
knowledge impossible.

"German Ideology, p. 149.

"This is a  reason why an analytic of ordinary lan- guage reading of Marx is
inadequate. Cohen, p. 30, literalizes the base/superstructure metaphor,  thus
com- mitting an important category mistake. Cohen's logical rigor  is won at the
expense of an excessively literal- minded interpretation  of Marx. See also E.
P. Thompson, The Poverty of Theory (New York,  1978), p. 84.

29

 "This approach to Marx follows Melvin  Rader, Marx1s Interpretation of History
 (New York, 1979). See especially the introduction.

"Most Marxists employ both the building and  con- versation metaphors as
heuristic devices, but there ex- ists a  considerable degree of disparity in the
degree to which each is  emphasized and endorsed. Circular Marxists tend to be
uncomfortable with "linear" metaphors. For example, Eugene D. Genovese (a
circular  Marxist) has tried to " . . . come to terms with the

'base-superstructure' problem that has plagued Marxism since its inception" by
emphasizing  that " . . . ideas, once called into being and rooted in important
social groups, have a life of their own." The World the Slaveholders  Made (New
York, 1969), p. vii.

2 *"Base-Superstructure tends to be the model used for the more reductive
interpretation." Rader, p. xxi.  Base can be conceived without superstructure,
but not vice versa.

2"This point is made by Lichtheim, p. 20. See also Friedrich Engels,
Anti-Duhrinq or The Dialectics of Nature for examples of his one-sided,
ultra-materialist Marxism.

2SPlekhanov and Lenin invented  "dialectical materi- alism," a term which Marx
nowhere uses. See Andrew  Rothstein, trans., G. V. Plekhanov, The Monist View of
History (New  York, 1972), p. 220 and passim.

"Lenin also generally sided with  the determinist, reductive Marxists—the
"transcript doctrine" of con-  sciousness outlined in Materialism and Empirio-
Criticism is the most  striking single example of this. Lenin is not consistent,
however; the  voluntarism of

What is to be Done? for example does not mesh comforta- bly with the fatalistic
mechanism of his other work.

2 , The divergencies of world history from Marx's own prognostications  forced
Lenin to attempt a reinter- pretation and reexamination. The  result was not
minor repair but wholesale revision; i.e., Imperialism,  the Final State of
Capitalism.

"Less  thanhalfofMarx'sworkhadbeenpublished prior to 1914. The unpublished
manuscripts, which in- cluded The Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts  of 1844,
The German Ideology, are two chief "indetermi- nist" texts.

"Istvan Meszaros, in "Contingent and Necessary Class Consciousness," p. 87 in
Aspects of History and Class Consciousness (New York, 1972) elucidates  the in-

30•

 terdeterminist conception of causality tersely: "In a mechanical conception
 there is a clear cut line of demarcation  between 'determined' and
 'determinants.* Not so within the framework of a dialectical metho- dology . .
 . although the economic foundations of  capi- talist society constitute the
 'ultimate determinants' of the  social being of its classes, these 'ultimate
 determinants' are at the  same time also 'determined determinants'." What novel
 meaning is to be  attached to the word "ultimate" in this context? When we
 under-

stand "ultimate" in this way, does the cause/effect distinction still exist? See
Seliger, p. 44.

1 "Georg Lukacs, History and Class Consciousness is a neo-Hegelian text.  See
page 61 for example, where class is defined on the basis of  consciousness
rather than with reference to its members' position in the economic structure.
This is the crux of the argument

•between E. P. Thompson and G. A. Cohen about the criteria for the definition of
class. See Cohen, p. 73-77.

"Antonio Gramsci, The Modern Prince and Other Writings, trans. Louis Marks (New
York, 1957), p. 82 writes that "the most significant philosophical  combi-
nation that occurred was that in which Marxism was blended with  various
idealist tendencies, and was

regarded by the orthodox, who were necessarily bound to the cultural currents of
the last century  (positivism, scientism), as an absurdity." Also associated
with the  introduction of idealist, neo-Hegelian elements into Marxism were
Korsch and Bernstein.

"Lukacs, in the 1967 preface to History and Class  Consciousness, p. xxviii,
gets down on all fours in ac- quiescing to  Stalinist criticism of his finest
book: "these facts meant that I had to rethink my theoretical position. In the
debates of the Russian Party I  agreed with Stalin about the necessity for
socialism in one country and  this shows very clearly the start of a new epoch
in my thought . . . ."

"Lichtheim, p. 67, hits the nail right on the head: " . . . Soviet Marxism is to
be understood as a monistic system sui generis, rooted in Engels' inter-
pretation of Marx . . . ."

"As E. P.Thomsonnotes,"... Icannolonger speak of a single, common Marxist
tradition, there are two traditions,  whose bifurcation and disengagement from
each other has been slow, and  whose final declara- tion of irreconcilable
antagonism was delayed—as an historical event--until 1956." Poverty of Theory,
pp. 188-89. Thompson  is substantially correct, but, as has been demonstrated, a
single  Marxist tradition (set of

31

 concepts) does not exist even  within Marx's own writings. Insofar as a single
 Marxist tradition has  ever existed, its source is in Stalin's practice, not
 Marx's theory.

"According to Althusser, Marxism is fundamentally opposed to moralism,
historicism, humanism, and empiricism. Not only does Theory invalidate  such
ideological misapprehensions, it also confirms and authenticates  itself by
establishing criteria for con- firmation and authentication  which are
self-confirming and -authenticating. " . . . theoretical  practice is indeed its
own criterion, and contains in itself defin- ite  protocols with which to
validate the quality of its product . . . they  have no need for verification
from external practices . . .,We should  say the same for the science which
concerns us most particularly:  histori- cal materialism." Reading Capital (New
York, 1968), p. 59.  Thompson is correct in noting that Althusser, like Stalin,
is beyond  morals, history, or disagreement. Perry Anderson, in Arguments Within
English Marxism (London, 1980), p. 105, attempts to exonerate Althusser  from
the charge of theoretical Stalinism, by referring to the historical facts of
Althusser's political activity. ItisworthnotingthatAnderson's  argument is based
on the "empiricist ideology" which Althusser

hasinvalidated(ReadingCapital,p.105). Althusser, if he is to be defended, must
be defended in terms of Theory or not at all.

"Althusser, Reading Capital, p. 319.

"Althusser's anti-Hegelian, scientistic reading of Marx is reductive,
deterministic  and dogmatic. He reads like Engels without the hi5toricism.
Althusser  also has a lamentable habit of literalizing his metaphors. See
Thompson, p. 104; Althusser, Reading Capital, p. 192.

"Althusser, Reading  Capital, p. 17. It is not coincidental that Althusser was
originally  raised as a Catholic. If the God of Aquinas was to be conceived of
not  as a person, but as a "structure," (or a "structure of structures") a
"whole possessing a type of unity quite different from the type of unity of the
spiritual whole," (ReadingCapital,p.107),thenGod,notbeing a  person, would not
have a will; History would then have no telos; thus  the Logos would be silent.
Althusserian structuralism is High  Scholasticism sanded down and varnished with
science worship.

"Ibid., p. 189. It is a pity that the word "structure," like the word "effect"
and like the word "determination," is never defined.

32

 "Ibid., p. 186. Is Althusser not ultimately asking "What causes Everything?" or
 "How does Everything cause itself?" Althusser pathetically echoes  Aquinas'
 search for a Prime Mover within the cosmic indifference. A  careful reader of
 Althusser eventuallygetsthehalfawed,halfdisappointed  feel- ing of walking
 among the ruins of a cathedral, as if God used to  live here bur left some
 centuries ago.

"Ibid., p. 310. This baroque elocution comes directly from the glossary.

"Balibar, in Ibid., p. 244. The whole quote is "In different structures, the
economy is determinant in that it determines which of the instances of  the
social structure occupies the determinant place. Not a simple  relation, but a
relation between relations; not a tran- sitive  causality, but rather a
structural causality." The justification for  inventing this complex, not to say
occult causality, beyond the  tautological require- ments of Althusser's system,
is unclear.

"Ibid., glossary, p. 311.

"Ibid., pp. 66-67. Moreover "The ideological knowledge effect is distinguished
by its properties (it is an effect of recognition—misrecognition in a  mirror
connexion) from the scientific knowledge effect. But insofar as  the ideological
effect, although it depends on other social functions  which are dominant in it,

really possesses its own knowledge effect, it falls within the general category"
(of the knowledge effect).

"We are thus liberated from the empiricist ideologyofhistory. Ibid.,p.105.

"'"In short, Althusserianism is Stalinism reduced to the paradigm of Theory.  It
is Stalinism at last, theorized as ideology." Thompson, p. 182. Paul  Anderson,
in Arguments Within English Marxism, p. Ill lets Althusser off the hook too
easily. As late as 1972, Althusser equated "violent  bourgeois anti- Communism"
with "Trotskyist anti-Stalinism." It is  rather late in the day (1976), some 23
years after Stalin's death, that  Althusser becomes overtly critical of Stalin.

"Lichtheim, p. 145:  "Evilly disposed people have been known to hint that
Athusser is really  after the replacement of Stalinism with structuralism . . .
It has also  been suggested that the remedy is worse than the disease, since
after  all Stalinism merely kills the body whereas structuralism destroys the
mind."

33

 "As Seligernotes(p.197),"ideologypurgedfrom its  pejorative meaning (Theory,
 the scientific knowledge effect) fulfils the function of theodicy. Theodicy
 justifies by God's infinite wisdom that  which appears in the finite perception
 of man as the short- comings of  the world. Ideology justifies the undenia- ble
 evil in revolutionary  methods and the visible im- perfections of a long
 established regime or  of revolu- tionary achievements. It does so in reference
 to the

wisdom and goodness either inherent in the existing or- der as a whole or in one
yet to materialize fully."

"In this group are Michael Harrington, E. P. Thompson, Bertell Oilman, John
Womack, Wolfgang Leonhardt, Raymond Williams, Melvin Rader, Eugene D.  Genovese,
Barrington Moore, Jürgen Habermas, Theodore Adorno, Max  Horkheimer, Herbert
Marcuse, and others.

"The central themes of  this humanist Marxism (or these humanist Marxisms) are
alienation (the  false con- sciousness of man in class society) and the
ideological  aspect of class relations. See for example Bertell Oilman,
Alienation,  Marx's Conception of Man in Capi- talist Society (New York, 1971).

"This is to be contasted with what Thompson (p. 169) calls Marx's "Grundrisse
Face," the later mecha- nistic, determinist Marx.

"See Rader, Marx's Interpretation of History, p. xxi, also p. 115. See also
Thompson, p. 9.

"Thompson, p. 47.

"See Rader, p. 15, and Thompson, Poverty of Theory, p. 46, and The Making of the
English Working Class, pp. 9-10. In defining class in terms of con- sciousness,
Thompson clearly shows a debt to Lukacs, p.

"Geuss,  Raymond, The Idea of a Critical Theory (New York, 1981), p. 77. Rader,
p. 15, and Thompson, Poverty, p. 96-97: "Yes, yes, and perhaps all this  is so.
But how might we put such a concept to work? Is law, for example, relatively
autonomous, and if so, au-

tonomous of what, and how relatively?"

"Circular Marxism shows its Hegelian origins in denying the Kantian distinction
between ethics as a practical and politics as a theoretical doctrine of  right.
(Thompson, Poverty, p. 175, p. 358) For Hegelians and circular  Marxists, there
is a theory of ethics as well as politics. Geuss, p. 57, notes of
"ideologiekritik" that "the ought is the ought of  rationality." As Habermas has
said, "I am concerned to

34

 question . . . the separation of science and ethics." (cited in Lichtheim, p.
 209.) This idea is essentially Platonic, as is Habermas* "ideal speech
 situation," which is the Platonic dialectic in disguise. For the  circular
 Marxists, as opposed to Althusser, history is a text in which  the Logos does
 speak. Marcuse, discussing Greek rationalism, sums the  issue up in One-
 Dimensional Man (Boston, 1964), pp. 124-25: "It is the  essentially human
 project. If man has learned to see and know what he  really is, he will act in
 accordance with truth. Epistemology is in  itself ethics, and ethics is
 epistemology." The good is knowable, and to know the good is to do it. In
 Platonic terms, the Good

is True.

"Thompson, Poverty, p. 290: "But because we know
thecausativecontextwithinwhichanhistorical event arose, it does not  follow that
the event can therefore be explained or evaluated in terms  of the cause.
Attention must be paid to the autonomy of political or  cultural events, v/hich,
none the less, are causally conditioned by  'economic* events." This conception
of causality is too vague for  criticism. In the practice of Marxist historians,
the rejection of  mechanism fre- quently appears to be a rejection of causal
necessity.  But of course the lack of necessity is not to be con- fused with
contingency. Eugene Genovese's treatment of the U.S. Civil War in The  Political
Economy of Slavery

(New York, 1968), p. 8 is a case in  point. Genovese rejects determinism, and
thus the Civil War is held to  be probable, not necessary.

"Meszaros, p. 116: "In an objective  dialeccical framework of reference, working
'exceptions' constitute the  general 'rules', which in an unending interchange,
are made into new  'exceptions' and new 'rules', thus both modifying
(concretizing) and  confirming the gen- eral conception itself." If this is the
case,  Marxism can predict the outcome of current political events; they will
manifest a general tendency toward the class- less condition (the  Marxian idea
of progress) or they will have some other quality or  qualities, which can be
integrated back into theory, which will  retroactively confirm that theory was
not wrong, just incomplete.

"Exceptions to the 'rules' which Marxian history lays down" do not falsify the
propositions of which this conception of history are composed; these
propositions are not, in principle, falsifiable.

"'Oilman, pp.  124-26 engages in an astonishing series of intellectual
contortions in  the course of at- tempting to salvage a consistent relationship
between  consciousness and its material concomitants. When the consciousness of
an individual is radically different from others whose objective  relations to
the means of

35

 production arc identical, the  cause is "personal life": "It is a matter of
 family, friends, and one's  very place on the earth each moment of the day.
 This is the area of  human existence which Marx stakes out, without too much
 precision, as  the 'personal life'. On occa- sion the conditions operating in
 this area are suffi- cient to overturn the results that naturally flow from
 one's activity in the mode of production, and the class relations based upon
 it." This appears to mean that a man whose consciousness is radically
 different from what is typical of people whose relations to the social  means
 of production are identical with his, has a "personal life," and  thus his
 consciousness is atypical

because of his personal life.  It might, with equal logical justification, be
argued that a man whose  con- sciousness is typical for his class also has a
personal life, and  thus his consciousness is typical because of his personal
life. This new construct, "^personal life," thus explains all manifestations of
human  con- sciousness, and since "personal life" even explains those cases,
like Newton, which "class" could not, Oilman has implicitly succeeded in showing
that the concept of class is more or less superfluous now that  it is meaningful
to explain consciousness in terms of "personal life."  One cannot help but
suspect that Oilman's consciousness of his unique  insight was deter- mined not
by his "personal life" but by the logical  necessity of explaining away the
incomplete correlation

between consciousness and class.

36
