---
title: After the intro, comes this
description: This connects to the section on Harari
date: 2022-02-27
src: https://michaelsugrue.substack.com/p/after-the-intro-comes-this
---

**Prologue On the Earth- Where Are We? Maps, Mercator Illusion, Creative Disorientation**

The condition of not knowing where you are is called being lost. Our maps  of the world, the ideas within which we live our lives, are defective.  The vast majority of the world’s literate people, when asked what *this*image is:

Mercator Map

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_map_projections

GET ALL THE RELEVANT MAPS HERE (SEE BELOW)

Will answer “the world”. Regrettably, it is a map, not the world, and like  any map it necessarily contains built in omissions and distortions. It  was drawn up by Gerardus Mercator in 1579. It was useful to contemporary European mariners for purposes of navigation and thus became a standard image. The particular distortions of his map are greatest as it moves  across latitudes from the equator to the poles. The more northerly or  southerly areas near the poles are drastically expanded compared to the  equator and tropics. However few mariners intended to go to the polar  regions, so the distortions didn’t matter much to them. The sailor’s  pragmatism was local, but Mercator’s problem with distortion was  universal. It is an unfortunate mathematical fact that there is no  perfect way to represent the surface of a sphere without distortion on a two-dimensional surface like a page.

One unintended consequence is that those who have the advantage of education have sometimes imagined that their mental maps are *not* distorted. This hybris is dangerous to you and the people around you.  The smarter you are, the more you need to remind yourself that *every insight is partial blindnes*s. Look at the map above. Areas far from the equator are distorted in  terms of their distances and are shown much larger than they actually  are. This is one of the major issues with a projection of a globe onto a cylinder. In fact, Greenland is nowhere near the size of Africa,  despite appearances; Alaska is smaller than Mexico, despite appearing to be triple the size; China is quadruple the size of Greenland, not  roughly equal. In the Mercator projection, Canada, the US, Greenland,  Iceland, Scandinavia, and Russia are inflated, as are Antarctica, New  Zealand, Australia, plus the areas around Cape Horn and the Cape of Good Hope. Europe is inflated as well. The tropics, particularly Africa and  South Asia are relatively larger than they appear in the Mercator  projection.  It is worth wondering if the regimes and policies that  emerged in the US and Russia been exacerbated by the fact that their  world map makes both of their territories look so much larger than they  really are. Mercator is not alone:

The world might also be mapped like this:

Dymaxion Projection

https://www.etsy.com/listing/634872820/buckminster-fuller-dymaxion-map-vectors?gpla=1&gao=1&&utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_campaign=shopping_us_e-art_and_collectibles-drawing_and_illustration-digital&utm_custom1=8719a521-6719-4f87-bf3c-20c172bcb860&utm_content=go_304499915_22746206795_78727442075_pla-106550409395_c__634872820&gclid=CjwKEAjw__fnBRCNpvH8iqy4xl4SJAC4XERPekbvqC32-ZsPvVeXsDTLzlkNCkZSM6kpU5kRWrgIIxoCq3vw_wcB

And a different set of distortions would be implied.

Other accurate, differently distorted maps look like this:

Polar Projection

https://www.dreamstime.com/stock-images-world-map-polar-projection-image13080214

and this:

Behrman Projection

http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/arcmap/10.3/guide-books/map-projections/behrmann-equal-area-cylindrical.htm

And this:

Healpix

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HEALPix

And this Upside Down N/S map

https://www.mapsinternational.com/upside-down-political-world-wall-map.html

And this world map centered on Chicago:

https://manywaystoseetheworld.org/products/custom-city-centered-world-map-prepared-for-you

which could as easily be centered on Shanghai or Johannesburg or Buenos Aires or some coral flyspeck in Polynesia, all with dramatically different  results.

As long as the principles used in making a map and the  relevant unavoidable defects are acknowledged, they are all true, but  they are of varying kinds of utility, depending on what purpose the map  is to serve. There are different ways of mapping the same world,  apparently vastly different, because of markedly different choices among misrepresentations. No map of the world is undistorted, yet they are  indispensable, because without a map there is no way to know where you  are and where you wish to be. You can’t even properly get lost until you know where you are. Get used to the fuzziness of maps. It is the price  of clarity. Get over the distortions in maps, they are unavoidable. They make accuracy possible. Imperfection is inevitable but improvement is  possible. As Borges cleverly pointed out, maps must necessarily omit  some things so that other things can be presented. Everyone is inclined to put the thing that concerns them the most in the center of their  maps, thus the Chinese “Middle Kingdom” and the Roman capital city in  the center of the “Mediterranean Sea”. Epic poetry or epic history also begins in the middle of things, temporally rather than spatially.

The shape of time is inevitably that of human life. Our stories and our  lives have plots. They are dynamic artifacts of memory integrating space and time and matter into *us*. Right on the cutting edge of temporality where now happens we exercise will: transforming  potentiality into actuality. Yet our understanding of space and time is  flawed. We know they are infinite. Some impressive science says so. Yet we can have no clue what “infinite” space or time means in any human  sense.  We know space as local, bounded like us. Time is similarly  constrained. Nobody has ever experienced “infinite time” in any way that can be communicated. Our time is a journey from a beginning to an end  and literature reflects this. Comedy is about revocable mistakes and  first half of life, which ends in marriage. Tragedy is about irrevocable errors and the second half of human life, which ends in death. Epic is  our collective, common story through history. Joyce saw that our story  is about a finite past and an infinite future swinging like a hinge on  the immediately experienced present.

One of the earliest known maps of the world

PHOTOS:

Anaximander’s world map

https://browse.startpage.com/do/show_picture.pl?l=english&rais=1&oiu=https%3A%2F%2Fupload.wikimedia.org%2Fwikipedia%2Fcommons%2Fthumb%2Fd%2Fd6%2FHecataeus_world_map-en.svg%2F825px-Hecataeus_world_map-en.svg.png&sp=a5fe5257a134bd1fbe8c8955f4b230a4&t=default

 ,

1565 English world map

https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Old-world-map.jpg

satellite photo 4.0 of planet

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth_observation_satellite#/media/File:Whole_world_-_land_and_oceans_12000.jpg

Like photographs, the value of maps is practical; their worth depends on  what you are trying to do with them. A satellite photo may fail to show  your dwelling, even at the highest resolution, but it may show the  location of a hurricane. Whether the photograph is a good photo or not  depends on whether you are selling real estate or forecasting weather.

No human representation, whether of space or time is perfect, lacking in  distortion but there is more than what we get wrong. The best art tells  us lies that reveal the truth about who we are and where we are and what our future could be. Maps are never as accurate in representing space  as we might wish.  It is the same with journeys through time, the  collected sagas of our species are fractured reflections of who we were, who we are, and who we might become. History on a global scale in the  twenty-first century is the convergence of hundreds of centuries of  stories lived by billions of people in vastly different circumstances  which might be mapped in an infinite number of different ways, for  different purposes, without any one map necessarily being either perfect or useless. This Big History is one of those stories composed of other  of stories intended to remind the reader that the Delphic Injunctions  are both good as ends in themselves and as a means in addressing the  Great Task: the reconciliation of love and reason. As is traditional, we begin, not at the beginning, but in medias res, with human beings of  our age symbolically mapping the world around them, pursuant to knowing  their world and themselves.

The World Historian’s Art As the Mapping of Human Time: What Are We Doing?

The study of world history in the last century has gone through three stages.

The first stage began during the era of WWI. Roughly a century ago scholars began to produce histories of world civilizations. These studies  focused on the independent development of disparate civilizations,  searching for their unifying principles and life cycles. The two most  influential practitioners were Arnold Toynbee and Oswald Spengler. They  drew a very broad readership because they combined their scholarship  with a concern among the western readers for the future of their own  culture/civilization, a future that many perceived to be in doubt.  Spengler’s Decline of the West first published in 1918, second volume  1923) was a pessimistic *cri de coeur* from a German intellectual that diagnosed a dying civilization and attributed  cultural exhaustion, creative bankruptcy and self-destructive politics  not just to Germany but in the West as a whole.[[1\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftn1)

Toynbee’s massive twelve volume A Study of History, (1934 to 1961) treated world  historical civilizations as independent organisms that follow a  universal pattern of “life” from genesis to disintegration.[[2\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftn2) He argued that in every civilization, a “creative minority” enabled  their civilization to respond to the challenges posed by environment,  geography and outsider peoples. The rise, efflorescence, and  ossification of these “creative minorities” contained within them the  fate of their civilizations. Both Spengler and Toynbee were the  spokesmen for historically traumatized peoples whose cultures had been  mortally wounded by the mutual suicide pact of the World Wars. These  world historians were especially influential among mid twentieth century Europeans because they addressed the anxiety about the future, the  crisis of confidence and the spiritual malaise that resulted from the  irredeemable self-immolation of the World Wars.

In  the second half of the twentieth-century a new generation of scholars  re-engaged with the study of world history. Unlike the first wave, these authors defocalized individual civilizations or culture zones, and  instead examined how large scale natural or interactive patterns worked  across time and space to change the human condition, sometimes in ways  that had little or nothing to do with nations and kingdoms or  civilizations. The French Annales school pioneered in examination of  history during the “longue duree” a period of time covering centuries  rather than years and large geographical areas that combined various  political or cultural domains rather than discrete civilizations. The  initiator of this school, Fernand Braudel, showed in his book The  Mediterranean (1949) how regardless of religion or political community,  the Mediterranean basin formed a single zone of exchange and culture  over an extended run of centuries from the late medieval through the  early modern period.[[3\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftn3) His Capitalism and Material Life 1400-1800 (1967) examined the change  in wealth during the transition of feudalism to capitalism and how this  gradually modified everyday life.[[4\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftn4) The Annales School focused on long term processes rather than political events, whole populations rather than individuals. They led to a new  level of abstraction in historical writing. Braudel’s History of  Civilizations (1995), focused on the almost imperceptible effect of how  large-scale elements like technology, geography, climate and environment shaped daily life as well as precipitating prominent historical events.[[5\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftn5)

William McNeill’s The Rise of the West (1963) was a result of a ten-year  project: a comprehensive history of the origins of Western civilization.[[6\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftn6) Once a civilizational backwater, McNeill traced in great detail the  world historical connections that eventually made the West the dominant  power that it has been for the last five centuries. Explicitly intended  as a response to Spengler’s Decline, McNeill offers a far more  optimistic account of the convergence of the disparate strands of world  history into a global narrative. McNeill also wrote what is arguably the most important history book of the twentieth century. In Plagues and  Peoples (1976) he created a groundbreaking, comprehensive account of all the major epidemic diseases globally from the beginning of recorded  history to the present.[[7\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftn7) He managed to plot the European Black Death (usually treated in  isolation by specialists) from its initial outbreak in India through its transmission along trade routes to China, Central Asia, the Middle  East, Africa and finally Europe. He also did the same for other epidemic diseases, which was an immense project. This analysis gave him a  powerful tool to explain the European destruction of the Mesoamerican  civilizations: Old World microbes that the inhabitants of the Americas  had no resistance to created mass death far beyond what Conquistadors  could have done with mere gunpowder. McNeill’s breakthrough was to  decisively connect natural science with social science by bringing  biology and history together.

Philip Curtin showed in Cross Cultural Trade in World History (1984) how trade created a  mutually beneficial commerce in ideas that was far more influential than the mere commerce in goods.[[8\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftn8) Carrying his analysis from the ancient river valley civilizations to  modernity, he shows how portable human ingenuity is and how advantageous it is for every culture not to have to re-invent the wheel.  Intercultural exchange is shown to be a positive sum game. In the Rise  and Fall of the Plantation Complex, (1990) Curtin showed how a vast  network of cross-cultural trade effectively created an “Atlantic Sphere” uniting Africa, the Americas, and the Western European littoral over a  period of centuries.[[9\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftn9) Curtin’s final work, The World and the West (2000) covers the  trajectory of Western expansion, dominance and decline over the last 500 years, with examples drawn from not just from the west but also from  Siam, Ghana, Japan, Buganda, Indonesia and the Ottoman Empire as well.[[10\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftn10)

I sat in on McNeill’s history of the world lectures while I was in  college at the University of Chicago; Curtin was the department chairman who hired me for my first job out of graduate school at Johns Hopkins. I agreed to construct and teach a history of the world from scratch. This work is an elaboration of that course I taught almost forty years ago.  The second wave of works by Curtin, McNeill and Braudel has received  immense academic acclaim, but they have not had much impact beyond the  scholarly community. This is largely because they are rather erudite and “academic” in their orientation and, unlike the first wave, they do not try to directly respond to ongoing concerns in the broader culture.

The third wave of world history addresses concerns prominent in early  twenty-first century civilization: environment, technology and the  acceleration of historical change in a globalized world. This third wave draws on the second by assessing natural and “material” influences or  readings of history, but does so in a way that directly, if narrowly,  connects to contemporary anxieties. Jared Diamond has argued in Guns,  Germs and Steel(1997) that Spain was able to colonize and conquer New  World civilizations because the east-west axial alignment of Eurasia  gave its Civilizations a vast advantage in terms of biological and  epidemiological diversity.[[11\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftn11) The explicit purpose of Diamond’s intervention was, of course, to show that it was *not* racial superiority that led to Europe’s advantage, and that the  imperialist pretensions of the West that were based on that presumed  superiority are indefensible. In Diamond’s work Collapse (2005), Diamond examined a varied collection of historical peoples, from Greenland to  Easter Island, whose culture drove them to an avoidable extinction  caused by environmental collapse.[[12\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftn12) Cultural dysfunction combined with a failure to meet the challenges of  environmental degradation on small scales portended a global  environmental catastrophe in the twenty-first century.

[[1\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftnref1) Spengler, Oswald, *The Decline of the West*, (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1932). For those that are paying attention, it is worth noting that Spengler is the conceptual Ur-source for the  contemporary racist/nationalist Alt-Right, which does in fact have an  intellectual tradition. The fact that the race baiting, quasi literate  canaille who agitate for white identity ethno-nationalism are generally  unaware of Spengler and his successor, the Nazi Carl Schmitt, does not  make these writers any less relevant.

[[2\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftnref2) Toynbee, Arnold, *A Study of History*, 12 Volumes, (London: Oxford University Press, 1961).

[[3\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftnref3) Braudel, Ferdinand, *The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II,* 2 Volumes (New York: Harper Colophon, 1976).

[[4\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftnref4) Braudel, Ferdinand, *Capitalism and Material Life, 1400-1800*, (New York: Harper Collins, 1973).

[[5\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftnref5) Braudel, Ferdinand, *The History of Civilizations*, (New York, Penguin, 1995).

[[6\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftnref6) McNeill, William, *The Rise of the West*, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963).

[[7\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftnref7) McNeill, William, *Plagues and Peoples*, (New York: Anchor, 1976).

[[8\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftnref8) Curtin, Philip, *Cross Cultural Trade in World History*, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984).

[[9\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftnref9) Curtin, Philip, *The Rise and Fall of the Plantation Complex*, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990).

[[10\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftnref10) Curtin, Philip, *The World and the West: European Challenge and Overseas Response in the Age of Empir*e, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).

[[11\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftnref11) Diamond, Jared, *Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies,* (New York: Norton, 1997).

[[12\]](applewebdata://1203A4C9-7890-4AB5-A6BC-A3FB7B587133#_ftnref12) Diamond, Jared, *Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succee*d, (New York: Penguin, 2005).
