---
title: From an unfinished world history
subtitle: TR and Che
date: 2022-01-03
src: https://michaelsugrue.substack.com/p/from-an-unfinished-world-history
---

Great Postcolonial Epics:

Africa

Latin America

Derek Walcott Omeros, searching for a way to “enter that light beyond metaphor”[[1\]](applewebdata://271ECA12-B94F-4736-9A60-AC519D913648#_ftn1)

Compare Che with American Teddy Roosevelt.

Both were born into wealthy well connected families which had the resources  to fund higher education, Che at the University of Buenos Aires, TR at  Harvard college. Both were sickly boys who struggled with debilitating  asthma, but embraced an active life nonetheless. TR was interested in  animals as a boy, Che was very fond of poetry. Both had fiery  dispositions combined with an intuitive grasp of political showmanship  which was not incompatible with full moral commitment to their moral  choices for and against the United States. Both made journeys in the  Americas largely determined by their starting point, geographically and  spiritually. Starting in Argentina, Che went from South to North and  back again while TR, starting in New York, went from East to West and  back again. Both men were charismatic military and political leaders  regarded by themselves and others as heroes. Both wrote autobiographies  and travel books, explaining their journeys, geographical and political. Both dropped out of professional school, TR abandoned Columbia Law, but Che resumed his studies at the University of Buenos Aires and finished  his MD. After his election victory to the New York state legislature,  Roosevelt decided to drop out of law school, later saying, "I intended  to be one of the governing class.”[[2\]](applewebdata://271ECA12-B94F-4736-9A60-AC519D913648#_ftn2) TR was a “progressive” who blew up a number of political logjams in his career as a public figure right through to his Presidency; in TR’s  case, Veblen was wrong, by “governing class” TR most certainly did *not* mean “leisure class”. He was indefatigable, relishing the joy of battle against entrenched evil, like corrupt cops or monopolist corporations.  Che, the heroic revolutionary, had a deeply religious commitment to  justice for the global South, a fearless and inspiring self sacrifice.  What Santayana said of Don Quixote is true about Che, we laugh at his  misadventures, not at his intent.

TR was so successful an  American politician that he ended up on Mount Rushmore. Che was so  successful a revolutionary that he moved from being a man to a symbol.  The famous photo of Che that has become an icon for the left was not  titled “Che Guevara” but “The Heroic Revolutionary”, the Hollywood  handsome Revolutionary Everyman. Both men invaded Cuba, overthrew the  government, believed themselves liberators, and intended to remake the  world. Both men were larger than life avatars of their respective  political traditions, for and against the US. Both men were flawed self  creators who were committed to creating the world in their own image,  which was as inspiring and flawed as they themselves were.

TR  chose to work on creating a robust vitality by embracing strenuous  exercise, particularly boxing, for which he was not naturally suited.  His project of self creation through service and political activity  reveals him as an prime example of the kind of able leader the US at its best could still produce in the early twentieth century, who was  comparable to the greatest American political figures from the  eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. After the death of his first wife  and mother just hours apart in 1884, TR was emotionally devastated. He  tried immersing himself in politics but no distraction seemed sufficient so he left the comfort of Manhattan for the life of a cowboy herding  cattle in North Dakota. A New York politician turned cowboy out west  sounds like the premise of a comedy, but TR was no dandy and he accepted the strenuous demands of life in the west without complaint. He hunted  grizzly bear because they were the most dangerous animals to be found.  He developed a love for the land and the irreplaceable beauty of places  like Yosemite. His time out west made TR a committed conservationist and determined steward of natural resources who would not tolerate  shortsighted destruction or waste. As he rose in political life, his  environmentalism emerged and became more conspicuous and demanding, at a time when such concerns were not popular, particularly within the  Republican party. Although it is hard to imagine anything more  archetypically American than TR the cowboy, he went further, buying two  ranches plus a thousand head of cattle. Eventually he was also appointed sheriff so he pursued outlaws in the Badlands. Sheriff TR imposing law  and order on the chaos of the American West was the main theme of his  later work, The Winning of the West in four volumes, an apologia for  Manifest Destiny and westward expansion published in 1889.

When he came back east in the late 1880s TR was took a place on the US Civil Service Commission in Washington, where he worked diligently to  dismantle the spoils system at the national level, rooting out such  corruption as he could from within a centralized bureaucracy. However,  he eventually decided in 1894 that he could do more good back home in  Manhattan so he accepted the position of head of the New York City  Police Commission when it was offered. He attacked the entrenched  corruption of the New York police, which went to the highest levels  within the department and the city government. He reorganized and  imposed accountability on the leadership within the force for corrupt  practices. At the same time he was an urban reformer concerned with the  plight of the immigrant poor, because the huge numbers of wretchedly  poor people in the ethnic slums of the city and the cultural pathologies that attended them were avoidable evils. TR regarded such a state of  affairs was an intolerable standing disgrace, an indictment of the  political elite which tolerated such evils, either due to corruption or  incompetence or both. In1894 Jacob Riis, the muckraking reformer who  wrote *How the Other Half Lives* met and began a  collaboration with TR. Riis’ volume, complete with photographs, revealed the wretched living conditions and hidden misery of New York’s largely  immigrant slums. Roosevelt was incensed at the extent and depth of the  poverty borne by thousands of indigent immigrants. Riis acknowledged  that TR had been of greater help than any other politician in addressing these problems, and TR, who was temperamentally given to seek clashes  with opponents, also inevitably took on the criminal gangs which preyed  on these poor immigrant communities because he was supervising the  police force at the same time.

Intending to step up and  enter national politics, TR joined the McKinley administration as  assistant Secretary of the Navy in 1896 where he pressed hard to expand  and modernize the Navy. The unique need of a continental sized power  like the US for a two ocean navy made him feel acutely that a central  American Canal, large enough for warships to move from the Atlantic to  the Pacific as needed, was a strategic necessity. TR found it trying to  obtain funding sufficient to his vision of a two ocean navy and at the  outbreak of the Spanish-American War in 1898, TR resigned his Washington post and organized a cavalry unit composed mainly of western cowboys  called the Rough Riders. Roosevelt and the Rough Riders saw action and  won acclaim from the press. This catalyzed TRs political elevation. He  was elected Governor of New York state in 1898, became a popular  national level political figure and was chosen as McKinley’s running  mate in 1900. They won, though McKinley was known to refer to his Vice  President as “that damned cowboy”. The next year when McKinley was  assassinated, there was a cowboy in the White House. TR rose from  assistant secretary of the navy in 1896 to president five years later,  an astonishingly fast climb. No one was more up to the challenge than  TR, at 42 years old, the youngest president in American history.

Roosevelt’s domestic program, called the “Square Deal” was meant to address the  economic and political problems that harmed ordinary working Americans  as byproducts of the rise of industrial capitalism. TR sought to protect consumers so he backed the Pure Food and Drug Act, which enabled  government oversight over the food supply and began scientific  regulation of the pharmaceutical industry. He also made the problems of  oligopoly and price fixing by large corporations a top priority. TR made a distinction between large industrial concerns who engaged in market  distorting, price rigging, anticompetitive practices and those that did  not. Big was not necessarily bad according to TR, but such businesses  required supervision by the federal government. Those “trusts” that *did* distort markets had to be broken up, and TR did so with relish as with  the Sugar Trust, which controlled 98% of the market. TR also imposed new regulations on Railroads, because they had monopoly pricing power and  they used it to squeeze those dependent upon rail to market their goods, particularly poor farmers. Since railroads are naturally shielded from  competition (it makes little sense to lay parallel tracks) they had to  be regulated as a public utility. The center of the Square Deal was  conservation. The waste of precious, finite resources; a rapacious  attitude toward exploiting the environment; a disregard for our  obligations to posterity; all of these were anathema to TR and he helped bring these issues to the national political discussion.

TR was a great political improviser who understood the complexities of  power and the simplicity of force. “Talk softly and carry a big stick”  was a favorite motto, yet even where he had little political leverage,  as in the coal strike of 1902 and the Russo-Japanese War peace talks, TR got excellent practical results. The Anthracite strike a year into his  presidency is a good example, as TR had no constitutional authority to  intervene in a private dispute between labor and owners. The practical  danger was too great, because millions of people depended upon this coal to survive the winter. TR “invited”, which in this context means  “summoned”, representatives from the mine owners and from the new union, the United Mine Workers, to the White House. The owners refused to  recognize or negotiate with the UMW, an intended to bust the union with  no change in wages. The UMW demanded recognition, plus a reduction in  hours and a wage increase. TR refused to accept this impasse and  demanded coal. This compulsory cooperation of labor and management  overseen by the president is a characteristically twentieth century fix  to problems unimagined in the nineteenth century US tradition of a  minimalist state. TR threatened to send in the army to nationalize the  mines and insure the flow of coal, since the owners threatened the  public interest and the strikers had to go back to work without sabotage or violence. Roosevelt promised to set up Commission of Neutral  Arbiters to investigate the conditions in the coal mines and report back proposing a solution. The UMW wanted a 20% wage increase and a  reduction from a ten hour to an eight hour workday, the Commission  recommended 10% and nine hours, which the mine owners consented to do.  This has always been regarded a huge victory for the miners because the  UMW had achieved de facto recognition as the bargaining representative  of all coal miners and membership in the UMW soared. The country  benefitted because a dangerous lack of fuel in the more northerly  climates of the US was averted. The business community was put on notice that there was conduct the government would not tolerate.

Shot in the chest by an assassin in the 1912 Presidential campaign in  Wisconsin, TR announced he has been shot, reporting it had been slowed  by a long speech folded in his chest pocket and that while the bullet  was in him at that moment, he would still give his speech, as he put it, “because it takes more than that to kill a Bull Moose”. This is  political showmanship of a high order, like President to be Andrew  Jackson, refusing medical attention while on the dueling grounds so that his dying opponent would not have the satisfaction of knowing Jackson  had taken a bullet in the chest. It is also slightly mad.

In his 1913 Autobiography, TR announces the political and moral views that he tried to realize, in the Forward:

Justice among the nations of mankind, and the uplifting of humanity, can be  brought about only by those strong and daring men who with wisdom love  peace, but who love righteousness more than peace. Facing the immense  complexity of modern social and industrial conditions, there is need to  use freely and unhesitatingly the collective power of all of us; and yet no exercise of collective power will ever avail if the average  individual does not keep his or her sense of personal duty, initiative,  and responsibility. There is need to develop all the virtues that have  the state for their sphere of action; but these virtues are as dust in a windy street unless back of them lie the strong and tender virtues of a family life based on the love of the one man for the one woman and on  their joyous and fearless acceptance of their common obligation to the  children that are theirs. There must be the keenest sense of duty, and  with it must go the joy of living; there must be shame at the thought of shirking the hard work of the world, and at the same time delight in  the many-sided beauty of life. With soul of flame and temper of steel we must act as our coolest judgment bids us. We must exercise the largest  charity towards the wrong-doer that is compatible with relentless war  against the wrong-doing. We must be just to others, generous to others,  and yet we must realize that it is a shameful and a wicked thing not to  withstand oppression with high heart and ready hand. With gentleness and tenderness there must go dauntless bravery and grim acceptance of labor and hardship and peril. All for each, and each for all, is a good  motto; but only on condition that each works with might and main to so  maintain himself as not to be a burden to others. We of the great modern democracies must strive unceasingly to make our several countries lands in which a poor man who works hard can live comfortably and honestly,  and in which a rich man cannot live dishonestly nor in slothful  avoidance of duty; and yet we must judge rich man and poor man alike by a standard which rests on conduct and not on caste, and we must frown  with the same stern severity on the mean and vicious envy which hates  and would plunder a man because he is well off and on the brutal and  selfish arrogance which looks down on and exploits the man with whom  life has gone hard.[[3\]](applewebdata://271ECA12-B94F-4736-9A60-AC519D913648#_ftn3)

The Progressive Era in America was primarily a change in the conception of  the state from the minimal Jeffersonian state to the active, responsive, problem solving mechanism of TR and Wilson. With TR, the new activist  American state of the Progressive era supplanted the minimalist  Jeffersonian state of the nineteenth century. It was no longer the  libertarian maxim, “he who governs best, governs least” but an imported  German idea of a much extended state Bismarckian state that went beyond  merely preventing force and fraud, into actively identifying and  addressing social ills. Combined with the pragmatic strain in American  philosophy such as Dewey’s The Public and Its Problems, there was a new  activism but also a new hybris as well. A new problem emerged in  American politics in the early twentieth century, the new activist state took arms against problems both domestic and *foreign*. Liberal interventionism was more successful in domestic than in foreign policy, with the conspicuous exception of eugenics, which was a blight. Again and again in the early twentieth century the US intervened  militarily in Latin America and the pace of intervention by American  forces increased dramatically over the number of interventions in the  nineteenth century. War in the Philippines was just another problem  solving mechanism by a state that was much enlarged and more dangerous.  Activism in domestic politics provided a logic for activism in  international politics. In international relations, during the  Progressive Era, the US government recognized the sovereignty of any  local regime that ensured that United Fruit Company or Anaconda Copper  or whatever, got paid; otherwise, the Marines go on vacation and  Americans get a geography lesson.

TR was not an  egalitarian, but he had genuine concern with the fate of poor and  unfortunate who came to the US seeking a better life for themselves and  their children. He felt responsible for the well being of everyone in  the US without diminishing his commitment to fostering individual virtue and self reliance for this same population. The great problem, not at  all unique to TR, is that his moral concern and commitment to justice  dropped off sharply beyond those he considered his own people. He  regarded the Spanish-American War as a “splendid little war”, which it  was for him, but there were many people for whom it was neither splendid nor little. TR thought it a strategic necessity to take over the Panama Canal project from the French, which they had abandoned on account of  Yellow Fever, and finish it. What is now Panama was previously the  northernmost province of Columbia. TR offered the Colombian government  ten million dollars and agreed to buy out the French investors for up to forty million dollars. The Colombian government was uneasy, because  Yanquis had been interested in such a project as far back as the time of Bolivar, who distrusted the Americans and refused any deal. The  Columbian government replied to TR’s offer with a counteroffer ten times larger. They did not grasp that like the Godfather, TR was making them  “an offer they could not refuse.”

TR was not interested in  haggling. Instead he offered support to rebels in Panama, who, supported by bribed Army units, declared themselves independent. They realized  their new found freedom in accepting the American offer of ten million  dollars that the Colombian government turned down. It is unlikely that  the inhabitants of Panama had the same lively interest in America’s  strategic problem of a two ocean navy that TR did but that did not  matter because they were not asked. Once the new nation TR had conjured  up agreed to the canal deal, he informed Congress of the *fait accompli*. TR was not even willing to consult with Congress on matters which were  clearly within its constitutional purview. TR was a knight-errant who  was a law unto himself who refused to obtain the advise and consent of  the Senate, much less from those who suffered as a result of his  jingoism. TR later bragged, "I took the Isthmus, started the canal and  then left Congress not to debate the canal, but to debate me."[[4\]](applewebdata://271ECA12-B94F-4736-9A60-AC519D913648#_ftn4) This is true. It contains an exceptional efficacy and dazzling self  assurance. However, TR exhibited repeatedly the arrogance of power,  undiluted, which becomes more seductive and thus more dangerous with  each successful escapade. No man or nation, however noble, can be a law  unto themselves.

One of the interesting facts about  the US/Canada relationship is the asymmetry of concern; Canadians  officials think about the US far more than the American officials think  about Canada. Much the same is true for the relation between America and everything south of the Rio Grande, including the Caribbean. With the  important exception of Mexico, it is generally the case that citizens of other South American nations have a far keener interest in what the US  does and does not do than US citizens or policymakers have in the  politics of Latin America. Mexico, the great exception, is an ongoing  political disaster that the US made. The source of all other issues  between Mexico and the US is the insatiable American demand for  narcotics, *not the suppliers*, which brings in so  much cash that the cartels have corrupted the Mexican and American  police and government. Of course, this makes Latin America fertile  ground in which conspiracy theories grow, reading the tealeaves, sifting for clues as to what crafty secret threat American action or inaction  portends. This makes insufficient allowance for the much greater  American interest in big threats but also it underestimates human  stupidity, which is far more prevalent than any official history is  authorized to admit. It is a worrisome fact that while there is more  stupidity than malice and in history, stupidity and dumb luck can be  just as lethal as in in the murder of Archduke Ferdinand and the Tonkin  Gulf Incident. America’s first tier worries are east/west superpower  problems with the Old World and global terrorism. Geography influences  history in that thinking in the US is oriented east/west, while the  thinking of the rest of the hemisphere is oriented north/south. Che  Guevara, a north/south thinker *par excellence*, provides an apt foil for Teddy Roosevelt.

As a young man, Che and a buddy went “on the road” with motorcycles riding north from Argentina to encounter the precarious human condition first  hand. The religious nature of Che’s pilgrimage toward Heaven is evident  in both the structure and in the content of his epic journey, where, as  for Werther, life became art became religion. Che Guevara’s Motorcycle  Diaries, and his Memoirs of the Cuban Revolutionary War form an as yet  underappreciated heroic postcolonial epic. Che was the most Christian of pseudo-atheist heroes, despite all protestations to the contrary, he  wanted to be a Communist Saint and he was *deeply* Catholic with a red veneer. He believed in *sin* and suffering. He found it to be ubiquitous and he was right. Augustine is at least as important as Marx in understanding Che and Dante is more important than either. Che documented his epic life in great detail:  First he visited Hell (but of course on earth), examining its various  levels. The extended time that Che and his pal ended up spending in a  leper colony in some Godforsaken backwater in Amazonia and then among  the poor and ill treated in capital cities and the desperate shantytowns strewn across the landscape was a descent into capitalist hell. The  Motorcycle Diaries is a new Inferno which shows that the compassion that drove Che to medical school and then to attend to lepers, transmuted  into revolutionary violence, death and destruction in the service of  love. The descent into Hell is capped off with a visit to the bottom of  Hell, the Heart of Darkness, the United States. Fortunately, since evil  is homogeneous, all he needed to know about the US was contained in a  couple of neighborhoods in Miami, where the wickedness of Capitalism  ruled undisguised. He had seen enough exploitation. He now understood  America and he now understood what was to be done. In his Memoirs of the Cuban Revolutionary War he finished his Odyssey.

In Mexico with thirty-six ragtag followers of Castro and an odd collection of  firearms: pistols, shotguns, and rifles various calibers Che practiced  with weapons. Che was a doctor, smart, loyal, charismatic and completely committed, so Castro wisely chose him as second in command. Then it’s  off for a sea voyage in a leaky boat to Cuba to start the Revolution  They are captured but then but improbably are freed, like Odysseus with  Calypso. After experiencing so much suffering, Che was promoted to the  new Cato in Purgatory, purifying sinners with just punishment during and after the Revolution.

Che’s moral killing in his Memoirs  was a kind of political Kabuki theatre, stylized and punctiliously rigid about protocol. In his official autohagiography, he helped expedite  uncontested Justice. When Che accused members of his own group, they  were guilty and a revolutionary court, unimpeded by law, would then  render summary judgment. The last act of condemned was always an  operatic change of heart straight out of Billy Budd. The condemned  traitors’ last act was always to spontaneously admit their heinous  counter revolutionary betrayals and then to ostentatiously thank Che  publicly, for the bullet that the Revolution was about to, quite  properly, put into his brain. It was effusive and sentimental, like a  retiree getting a gold watch at a retirement dinner.[[5\]](applewebdata://271ECA12-B94F-4736-9A60-AC519D913648#_ftn5) The guilty accused restated how much he loved the Revolution. Then Che  killed him, as Revolutionary Justice required, with a bullet to the  brain. As Che said, the Revolutionary is driven by love, and this is  true, but as Dante notes, all of our sins are love of the wrong things.  Cromwell butchering Ireland was driven by gnostic Puritan love for  Jesus. Love of stern inflexible Virtue was uppermost in Robespierre’s  mind as he sent to the guillotine so many of his former friends who had  fought and suffered for the revolutionary cause, but who, as a group,  had all simultaneously become dangerous counterrevolutionaries. Lenin’s  love for humanity and the future was so strong that he avowed a  preference for mass starvation rather than allow a free market in grain, because he took the long view, and any evil, like the liquidation of  the kulaks, can be justified if it is seen sub specie aeternitatus, as a necessary, temporary, bridge to Perfection. Pol Pot’s education at the Sorbonne imbued him with a love for those people of Cambodia that were  uncontaminated by capitalism that was so great that he informed the  exploitative quarter of the country’s population that “To keep you alive is no benefit, to kill you is no loss” and exterminated them  systematically in the first two years of his regime. Love is more  dangerous than people realize. The goal of uncontested justice requires  an infinite series of bullets to the brain to realize. Disputes over  justice are inevitable in a free society and they are not a defect.

Che was a genius. The Odysseus-like cleverness of Che is best seen in a  suggestion Che made to Fidel when they were separating into two groups  to conduct separate guerrilla strikes. This example of his cleverness  shows the brilliance of the chess grandmaster or the most destructive of computer hackers. Che saw assumptions that many people had become  unaware of, and he took advantage with pure destructive genius, a mental judo astonishing in its power and economy and intellectual leverage.  Fidel intended to split the revolutionary forces and said that he would  head the first brigade and that Che would command the second. Che  stopped him and said, “No, I will command the *fourth* brigade”. Fidel didn’t get it, at least at first. Fidel would command  brigade one, Che insisted would command brigade four, because he saw  what everyone else assumed but forgot was an assumption. *“You can’t have a brigade one and four without brigades two and three. That would be silly.*” Yes, it would be silly. That is the amazingly deep point. Being silly  might make a great deal of sense, and as Dada showed, nonsense can be  meaningful, Che’s tiny piece of conceptual “malware”, deployed at  exactly the right place and time, simultaneously cut the effective  strength of Batista’s army in half, gained popular support for the  rebels and hatred for the Batista regime plus decoyed the regime from  the real revolutionary hit and run military actions. This asthmatic,  intellectual, quixotic poet/doctor was a formidable warrior of the mind. His tactic, like the wooden horse of Odysseus, turned the tide of the  Cuban Revolutionary War and was more important in winning the war than  anything Fidel ever did or said.

This tiny Machiavellian  masterpiece was Stuxnet before the digital age. When they were among  people that they did not trust, Che and Fidel could let slip important  information about the location and vulnerabilities of brigade three or  two, neither of which existed. Half of Batista’s armed forces were  tasked with finding and destroying imaginary targets, the military felt  the heat from the dictator, so they begin to buy information from pseudo informed spies and brutalize the population to locate the rebels. Of  course, brutality against the population in general created hatred for  the regime and support for the rebels and if the soldiers were cruel  enough, as they leaned on the population, they began getting, first a  little, then a lot, of information about where brigades three and two  were last night or would be three days hence. Military officers that  could not produce results were sacked and their replacements knew they  had to produce bodies to keep their promotions and predictably, they  did.

The more unreliable the information, the more violence  against the local sympathizers who hid and supported brigades two and  three became necessary, the more the peasants showed their political  bona fides to the soldiers by voluntarily offering information about the guerillas, insisting that they had seen brigades two and three in the  mountains two days ago and they were now equipped with landmines,  artillery pieces and nuclear submarines. As the violence from the  soldiers rose, eventually rural people began proactively accusing other  peasants to avoid suspicion themselves. Che’s brilliance lay in  spiritual judo of the highest order, taking advantage of an opponent’s  vices to use their own injustice against them. Moreover, this tactic  allowed Fidel and Che to send messengers to each other using messengers  that they suspected to be spies, who would arrive with the secret  information about the third brigade from Che or Fidel himself, and be  sent far away, to the other side of Cuba to take a message to the leader of brigade number two about the rendezvous point with brigade three on  the nights when Che and Fidel intended to strike somewhere else. Che  accomplished all this by changing one word, “second”, to another,  “fourth”. The smart and nimble can defeat the strong and confident.

The rebel side won the Cuban Revolution and in a comic interlude, Che was  made minister of the economy. There has not been a man less interested  in money since Christ Himself, so Fidel put him in charge of organizing  banks, allocating capital, setting prices and wages, imposing taxes,  controlling the currency, supervising import and export and restraining  multinational corporations and confiscating their soon to be  nationalized investments. It requires a degree of optimism that can only be described as revolutionary for Fidel to anticipate that Che’s  economic interventions would produce prosperity.

Thereafter, Che began to teach all nations, starting with Angola and Bolivia, that  they must repent because judgment is nigh and the end of the evil  capitalist world is at hand. He sought martyrdom and found it. The  tradition of Christian eschatology, dating back before the gospels were  even written, is so evident in his thinking that it separated Che from  his more prudent, less apocalyptic, less overtly religious Communist  allies. Che later told a reporter from an English Communist newspaper,  The Daily Worker, that during the 1961 Cuban Missile Crisis, he intended to respond to American (Hell, the Source of Evil) brinksmanship by  going beyond the brink. Che said that he had then and still did now  advocate launching a nuclear first strike on the cities of the US  eastern seaboard and would that he have launched if the missiles had  been under his control rather than that of the Russians.[[6\]](applewebdata://271ECA12-B94F-4736-9A60-AC519D913648#_ftn6) He avowed that MAD, the mutually assured destruction that would have  left no living thing on Cuba (or Russia), was a price he was willing to  pay for the final victory of the people’s revolution over capitalism.  Che *sought* a nuclear Armageddon that Khrushchev  must have thought completely daft, failing to note that Che’s kingdom  was not of this world and that Paradise is worth any sacrifice. Che was a True Believer. Fidel himself must have been very uneasy about Che. He  soon equipped him to lead guerilla insurgencies thousands of miles away  from the Caribbean. Dictators generally find that saints who are not  distant in time are best kept distant in space.

Times  change. Today the CCP is the most conspicuous index of how twentieth  century Marxism has not aged gracefully in theory or in practice in the  twenty first century. Today Alibaba.com, China’s main internet  marketplace, advertised 115 different products using Che’s Heroic  Revolutionary photograph, including not just T shirts but also:  commemorative motorcycle helmets, bracelets, license plates, candles,  electric guitar speed knobs, humidors, camo baseball caps, keychains,  beltbuckles, polyester shower curtains, beach towels and refrigerator  magnets, among many other things, all available at wholesale prices. The Communist hero has become a capitalist commodity. Courtesy of the  largest “Communist” party on the planet, it only takes a few clicks to  get a good deal on Che Guevara beach towels and fridge magnets.

NEED PIX

[[1\]](applewebdata://271ECA12-B94F-4736-9A60-AC519D913648#_ftnref1) Derek Walcott, *Omeros*, New York, Farrar Straus and Giroux, 1990

[[2\]](applewebdata://271ECA12-B94F-4736-9A60-AC519D913648#_ftnref2) Brands, *TR: The Last Romantic*, New York, Basic Books, 1998, 126

[[3\]](applewebdata://271ECA12-B94F-4736-9A60-AC519D913648#_ftnref3) Theodore Roosevelt, *Autobiography*,

[[4\]](applewebdata://271ECA12-B94F-4736-9A60-AC519D913648#_ftnref4) Find cite

[[5\]](applewebdata://271ECA12-B94F-4736-9A60-AC519D913648#_ftnref5) Che Guevara, *Memoirs of the Cuban Revolutionary War*, Ocean Press, Melbourne Australia, 2006, 57.

[[6\]](applewebdata://271ECA12-B94F-4736-9A60-AC519D913648#_ftnref6) Jon Lee Anderson, *Che Guevara; A Revolutionary Life,* New York, Grove Press, 1997 545.
