---
title: This section comes after Harari
subtitle: There is a limit to how much I can post
date: 2022-02-28
src: https://michaelsugrue.substack.com/p/this-section-comes-after-harari
---

Big History Lessons: An Overview

This work will draw on all  three of these waves of discourse regarding human events. The second and third wave are critically important for showing how natural and social  processes and interactions have conditioned the development of human  history on a global scale, and how such processes form a sort of matrix  within which humans must operate. Central to this has been an  appreciation of the importance of science and scientific knowledge in  the realm of historical development. This work shares this orientation,  but argues that it does not go far enough in so far as science itself is part of human culture, and is subject to the same changes over time and place as all things human. Inevitably a dialectic emerges between  natural science and social science. As human communities learn more  about the world around them, they inevitably learn more about  themselves: the knower and the known cannot be fully disentangled. Self  is created by circumstance and vice versa. New understandings of the  natural create new understandings of the human. The human sciences are  not abolished but transformed. The knower and the known are locked in a  cycle of question and answer. New answers to the question “Where am I?”  (embedded in Nature) always provokes and modifies and refines the  question “Who am I?” (a conscious subject) which in turn provokes new  questions about Nature and then Mind in an endless cycle of reciprocal  development. Natural Science and Social Science are conceptual Siamese  Twins that cannot be entirely separated but also cannot be perfectly  unified. The modification and persistence of human of human  consciousness and its self creation might be called (in Plato’s sense)  “the law of conservation of music”.

By treating culture as part of the human we can reintegrate the symbolic structures dealt with in the  first wave with the purportedly more “material” elements in the second  and third.  Indeed, this project works on the assumption that as  experiencing subjects humans cannot exist as fully human, much less  “civilized,” historical beings without a cultural environment that  produces shared meanings, purposes, and values that allow for large  scale human sociability, cooperation, and flourishing. The apogee of  every culture distinguishes the sacred from the profane. Consciousness  is neither an illusion nor is it less real than nature. This is not to  deny the importance of scientific knowledge and interpretation, but  rather to historicize it. In fact, the central conceit of this book will be that world history is conditioned by changes in our civilized  understanding of nature and its processes, and that this understanding  is part and parcel of our larger cultural horizon.

The new  influences on this Big History include pushing back the temporal  frontier of what was previously regarded as “prehistory”. Rather than  beginning with the conventional story of ancient river valley  civilizations around 3,000BC, this work pushes back the origins of  history by an order of magnitude, back to the earliest incontestable use of symbols in the Paleolithic. Examining the preconditions and  implication of these belief systems from 40,000+ years ago, we will then examine the shift from sympathetic hunting magic in cave paintings to  the first known funerary/ancestor cult that involved building in stone  huge cultic monuments at the end of the last Ice Age, between10 and  9,000BC.

At what point does human consciousness unequivocally  rupture the cyclic repetitions of hominid life? Control of fire is a  transformative achievement that is hundreds of thousands of years old  but there is little to go on. As we were taught in history graduate  school, “No evidence, no history”. Human beings have buried their dead  for at least 100,000 years and it is hard to see how this activity,  unknown among other hominids, serves any practically useful function.  Sorrow at a loss and/or preparation for an afterlife seem to be  indicated by such practices. At the origin of human culture may lie the  rueful acknowledgement of human finitude, the certainty of death. Before the invention of taxes, what else but death could be depended upon?

The first creative deployment of symbols would have left no traces. The  earliest evidence for self consciously creative humans would have been  evanescent. Body painting and marking, plus lively arts like singing,  communal dance or early music would have left no data. The most  suggestive ancient findings have come from the Blombos Cave site in  South Africa, where evidence has been found of red ochre paint making  that is seventy five to one hundred thousand years old. The petroglyphs  at the Blombos site are extraordinarily ancient but hard to date  exactly. Both dance and body painting must be of extraordinary antiquity but regrettably the first unequivocal signs of human mental life  creating symbols are found in the physical remains of material culture.  Forty thousand year old bone flutes are clearly products of a human  culture, as are cave paintings or carvings and petroglyphs, like the  Venus of Willendorf or the Lion Man or the Sulawesi cave drawings.

 **PIX**

Art, religion and science start as one undifferentiated mass of what I might call “lore”. Art was closely connected to religious expression (as in  grave goods) and the social cohesion fostered by religion was both the  result of and a stimulus to, thought. Cult, creativity and contemplation take a long time to disentangle. Symbolism may have been suggested by  natural “indexes”. An old tracker may point at hoofmarks in the earth  and say the word for “deer”, youngsters growing up in such circumstances would pay careful attention, a very sustained and careful observation  of such lessons and signs. This education would produce and expand  useful neural networks for processing such impressions. Eventually  tracks on the ground for a dozen or more species might be “legible” to  the experienced hunter. It is not an impassible symbolic jump from  tracks that represent deer to marks on stone that represent deer. The  interpenetration of things and symbols is shown in the most  “representative” objects that are both tools and symbols. The sword  symbolizes war and the handshake symbolizes friendship. The smile is a  natural representation or index of happiness. Affluent young people of  the early twenty-first century, whose neural networks have been shaped  by peering into cellphones and computer screens, have brains that are  organized differently from those of their elders.

Symbols enabled the *durable* (as opposed to the evanescence of song or speech or dance) external  representation of what appears in public (Nature, objects of sense  perception like the sun or deer or people). This *creates* *a unique new* human capacity; the durable external representation of what does NOT  appear in public, only in private (Mind or Subjectivity gets objectified in symbols rendering visible to the public intention, feeling, desire,  imagination). Poetry is born which means lies are told. Metaphor emerges from its chrysalis. The accumulated views of nature and of our place in it do not disappear as new scientific revolutions supplant those  before. Archaic worldviews continue on in the residual customs,  languages and thoughts of every culture and every individual. Earlier  conceptions of the world and consciousness are coded into folklore,  tradition and “common sense”. We still say the sun “rises” and “sets”.  In the West, educated people still sometimes throw rice at weddings or  look up horoscopes. We still speak of “being exposed to the elements”  but knowingly or not, this reference to weather is from Ancient Physics: earth, air, fire and water. Ships are “Christened” with a sacrificial  bottle of champagne, because alcoholic libations were and sometimes  still are thought to bring good luck. The Chinese still use fireworks at New Year, the caste system still exists in India. Exorcisms are still  performed in various spots on the globe. Some skyscrapers skip the 13th  floor. There are archaic holdovers in even the most technologically  sophisticated cultures, and not without reason. The demands of the  psyche prompt people, both ancient and modern, to organize into complex  groups whose actions externalize and try to realize their collective  internal longing for meaning, hope, order and the infinite. These  demands continue into the present, invited or not, because the myriad  difficulties and disappointments of human life require extraordinary  consolation.

It is possible to thematize both conflict and cooperation in thinking about political history.[[1\]](applewebdata://C7A7C114-A1FB-40A7-BA8C-2361C1A0D426#_ftn1) When he taught the Great Books core course at Columbia University, the  great historian Richard Hofstadter provocatively used to begin his  lecture on Marx by writing on the board, “All history is the history of  class cooperation.” He was not necessarily advocating the latter over  the former, he was pointing out it was at least as true as Marx’s claim  to the contrary, and intellectually exciting in a very different way. It is well worth pondering the fact that without both social  stratification *and* social cooperation, neither the Great Wall of China or Apollo 11 or the Italian Renaissance would never have gotten achieved. We must find a way to create cooperation between  individuals and groups where there is common benefit and public  interest. Cultures involve both cooperation and conflict, but the  greatest human achievements such as the Great Wall of China required  cooperation on an almost unimaginable scale, millions of people, for a  period of many centuries. The immense sacrifices involved in  constructing and maintaining the Great Wall were invested in the long  term safety and security of China, and the Wall required sacrifice.  Political order inevitably combines cooperation and conflict, freedom  and coercion. History is the interference pattern formed as waves of  heteronomy and autonomy, force and freedom, overlap.

Whatever was different about humans allowed them to adapt to every environmental niche on the planet, which meant that they, uniquely, propagated  further and faster than any other species. New discoveries have emerged  that may push the origin of cave painting (and symbolism) back beyond  60,000 BC, but it remains to be seen if these new early dates will  survive scrutiny. Humans were certainly something different by the time  ritual and art emerged, from the idea of symbolism (perhaps 100,000  years ago), but it is impossible to say where or when or how many times  this happened. The earliest cave painting, petroglyphs and carvings  required a very sophisticated kind of mental activity: symbolism, the  very counterintuitive idea that something can be something else. The  idea that marks in stone can be people or animals or the sun requires  creativity, rationality and a disciplined imagination. Still more  sophisticated is the idea entailed in the creation of painting and  petroglyphs that four-dimensional animals can be re-presented as  two-dimensional scrapings. Verbs were being transformed into nouns, acts into pictures, processes into things. A common grammar of thought and  palette of symbols was carving up the world into shared categories for  those who participated in the symbolic and ritual life of the group.  There is no doubt that there was an emergence of a specifically human  mental life, registered in the creative deployment of symbols, at least  40,000 years ago and probably much earlier, but it is impossible to say  how much earlier or where this started.

The media in or through  which symbols are constructed also tell a tale. Speech, song, dance,  music are all evanescent, always in flux and existing only in the now.  Drawing and carving achieve a symbolic and physical fixity, creating a  center of space and time around it, like Wallace Steven’s Jar in  Tennessee. Carving in bone, rock, antler, wood, all created static  objects opposed to the impermanence of other media for symbolism.  Carving tree trunks made possible carvings outside the human scale and  as Mircea Eliade pointed out, these sacred shafts were understood as  being the axis mundi. The oldest known example of a massive carving made of wood looming outside the human scale is the Russian Shigur idol,  which is about 12,000 years old. Because this is an exceptionally well  preserved specimen made of organic material, it is probably only one of  multiple examples, and also probably not the earliest of these massive  pillar carvings. The high point of sophistication in carving these  larger than human wooden pillars will eventually be found in the  northwestern Pacific coast of North America, totem poles. The  distinction between the Old and New world erodes as the likelihood of  premodern contacts emerges from new kinds of evidence. The tribe of  nomadic Siberians that carved the Shigur idol and others like it may  well have contributed to the mix of Old World peoples that crossed to  the New World.

Every society thinks they are in the center of  things, and the axis mundi inevitably runs through their space, an  omphalos marked by symbolic pillars. This idea reaches its apogee in the move from carving in wood to massive carving in stone. The  biodegradation of wood is easily observable, but the erosion of stone is generally too slow to be perceived. The change in media bespeaks a  change in the aspiration for permanence in the people in the people that produced them. The Washington Monument, Nelson’s Column and other such  stone totem poles are intended to be maximally permanent, yet they are  still descendants of some predecessor of the Shigur idol. Moving from  the monumental carving of organic wood to the much more labor intensive  inorganic stone monuments costs an immense price in sustained heavy  work. Since this price has been paid by so many societies for more than  one hundred centuries, they must have believed that they were getting  something for their heroic toils. Monumental stone architecture and  stone sculpture are acts of Promethean defiance against time, change,  entropy, death, as McCarthy’s Judge informed us.

There  are apparently many other sites of Neolithic hunter gatherers creating  art in the context of cultic practices. Recently in western India,  several hundred larger than life petroglyphs have been discovered etched into rocky hilltops that have been provisionally dated at approximately ten thousand BC. They appear to have been made by hunter gatherers and  the carvings appear to represent people and animals, including  crocodiles, birds, elephant, fish, perhaps even hippos, rhinos and  sharks. After the invention of agriculture and sedentary life in the  Middle East about 8,000 BC, fertility cults were added to funerary cults in the first agricultural villages. These cultures both gave their  denizens an understanding of their place within the larger universe, a  doctrine of their fate beyond their mortal life spans, and a normative  basis for association and cooperation in bands and communities of  varying sizes. Sedentary life preceded the domestication of food.  Sedentism was a response to *psychic* needs, with  cultic practices providing intelligible boundaries to oneself and the  world, and thus a moral center to subjectivity. The domestication of  wheat *follows* after the “symbolic revolution” at Chatal Huyuk, which means, once again, that cult comes first.

The earliest known large human cooperative aggregations at the end of the  last Ice Age was an ancestor cult in eastern Turkey which required  thousands of workers to construct the first known monumental  architecture in history. The ritual center at Gobekli Tepe was the site  of seasonal feasting and cultic ceremonies which must have been objects  of great anticipation and attention for those foragers that  participated. It is one of a dozen man made hills within one hundred  kilometers. The emergence of cooperation among multiple hunter-gatherer  bands soon after the end of the last Ice Age (12,000 years ago) for  cultic purposes was unprecedented behavior. This cooperation in building an immense ritual center lasted for a period of more than ten centuries at Gobekli Tepe in Turkey. It seems to have been a funerary cult  combined with a kind of ancestor worship. It also has something to do  with masculinity. There are hundreds of stone animal sculptures, but in  every case with species like pigs or foxes or wildcats where there is an evident sexual dimorphism, all are male. Perhaps these animals had some totemic significance or perhaps Gobekli Tepe served as a kind of “men’s house” for puberty rituals. There is also evidence of feasting. It may  be that the acephalous T shaped idols were connected with a “Skull cult” as in found in other archaic sites like Jericho and Chatal Huyuk. This  ritual complex predated by millennia agriculture, the domestication of  animals, metallurgy, writing, the wheel and the other cultural  achievements of the river valley civilizations that come much later.  Religious rituals, the product of human consciousness, were the origin  of large-scale human cooperation, *not* environment or economic necessity. Religion is the seedbed of civilization, out of which all the rest of culture grows.

The persistent patterns of attention, thinking and sensation characteristic of cultural life dialectically modified cultural practices, the  “software” of human society. However, it is important to note that  patterns of thought and practice also modified the physical “hardware”  of the human brain. This is the reason why the mental habits and  capacities of contemporary humans differ so markedly from those of the  ancients. The tradition of epic poetry, for example, generally started  out as an oral tradition in most cultures. It may seem incredible to us, living in a world marked by the instant retrieval of information, that  generations of illiterate, itinerant bards should be able to recite from memory the 27,000 lines of poetry that make up the Homeric epics, or  that an Islamic hafiz should be able to memorize the entire Koran, or  that some Platonic dialogues are framed as being repeated verbatim by  someone who heard them, perhaps second or third hand. In the Phaedrus,  Socrates noted that writing removes a burden from memory, and that the  ability to memorize atrophies with disuse. This is factually correct.  Most people in the age of the Internet find it impossible to memorize  lengthy groups of words the way the ancients could.

The  burial of the dead and sympathetic magic related to success in hunting  combined with the handprints which “sign” cave paintings signalize the  emergence of a distinctly human culture, different from other hominids.  New scientific work done on “mirror neurons” and “neural plasticity” has been applied to art history and cultural history, by Iain McGilchrist  and John Onians and this can no doubt be extended further.  Neuroarthistory, a new field that combines new knowledge of the  structure and function of the human brain (derived from MRIs) with the  history of art is the first completely twenty-first century historical  venture.[[2\]](applewebdata://C7A7C114-A1FB-40A7-BA8C-2361C1A0D426#_ftn2) The main practitioner is John Onians. Iain McGilchrist, a practicing  neurologist, has extended some of these new findings about mirror  neurons and neural plasticity and hemispheric differences to a  discussion of the history of Western culture as a whole in an  extraordinary book, The Master and His Emissary. The emergence of the  most important, characteristically human cultural achievements,  language, symbolism, myth, kinship and such changed the demands made  upon the human brain, *changing the neural structure of the brain itself*, which in turn facilitated further changes in culture. Eventually, the  cultural activities that gesture at transcendence, which were described  by Hegel as the “Realm of Absolute Spirit”: Art, Religion and  Philosophy, emerge, first as a mass on undifferentiated lore, later  precipitating out as self-conscious, separate, standalone disciplines.  The dialectic of brain and thought, hardware and software, inside and  outside, subject and object are necessary to a current understanding of  the human, its history and its prospects.

Art,  religion and philosophy in archaic human life signal the emergence of  self consciously creative human consciousness. Life size cave paintings  were the original art within the original art galleries. Symbolic  representation extended human consciousness beyond the boundaries of any individual brain. Consciousness was statically externalized.[[3\]](applewebdata://C7A7C114-A1FB-40A7-BA8C-2361C1A0D426#_ftn3) Evidence for an unambiguously *human* history begins here. The earliest of these cave paintings which were  “signed” by handprint of the artist show the emergence not only of  self-consciousness and but also self-assertion. This nameless artist was responding to a question nobody previously heard being asked, “Who are  you?” answering, “I am the creator of these animals, the god of two  dimensions.” He or she was not merely representing objects of experience but implicitly (and with handprints, explicitly) representation of the  artist, the experiencer as well. These handprints are actually  self-portraits. This is the first evidence of a post-simian Descartes,  an inhabitant of a new world, thinking about him or herself thinking.  These paintings were dominated by animal forms and probably associated  with some kind of sympathetic magic intended to facilitate the hunt.

**PIX OF CAVE PAINTING**

The self-consciously creative deployment of symbols with the intention of  manipulating nature is the mark of the distinctively human. The  primatologist van der Waal wrote, “I don’t usually argue this way, but  no primate has the capacity for symbol creation that humans do.”[[4\]](applewebdata://C7A7C114-A1FB-40A7-BA8C-2361C1A0D426#_ftn4)  The emergence of self-consciously creative symbol making was something analogous to a quantum leap of humanity’s relation to nature like an  electron into a new atomic shell. We have ontological continuity with  chimps and bonobos, but there is also something unique in the emergence  of a creative representation of nature that separates us from the other  animals. We are qualitatively different. The handprint among the animals and female genitalia represented in cave art gestures at life and  death. It signals the birth of the “self”. The handprint is a demand for *recognition* by the viewers. It is the birth of pride, the demanding self-awareness that Hobbes described as the essentially human emotion.

The earliest human cultures had not differentiated what would become in  later culture separate domains of thought and practice. The ancients  were storytellers and narrative connected cult to contemplation to  creativity. These stories, precursors to the mythic traditions of the  great sedentary civilizations, were the articulation of the self  -dentification of the peoples that created them as well as the identity  of those individuals that told and retold them. Thus Rome incorporated  Greece by adapting their myths. Art is a cumulative human gesture that  extends from the earliest glimmers of human experience toward an  infinite horizon of possibilities. Pictures of animals and repeated  patterns at Blombos cave in South Africa are of enormous but uncertain  antiquity.

Ancient texts in religion and philosophy, which  generally assume a premodern account of the cosmos, are often still  valuable, nay indispensable, for their insights into the human  predicament. Even texts assuming an outmoded physics have much to tell  us about the fragility of human life, the moral obligations we have to  ourselves and others, and how we best direct our all too finite choices. Archaic literature and poetry that was created under every earlier  conception of nature still educate our *imagination*. Much of what ails us comes from poorly educated imagination, which is  especially vulnerable to seduction of various kinds. Art, religion and  philosophy respond to questions that science cannot ask, much less  answer. Viewing Rembrandt’s self portraits chronologically arranged will tell the thoughtful observer more about Husserlian time than the most  precise Einsteinian atomic clock. Cain and Abel, David and Goliath, the  Good Samaritan, Sophocles’ Oedipus, Shakespeare’s Lear, Milton’s Satan,  Dostoyevsky’s Ivan Karamazov, all continue dwell amongst us,  unexpectedly reappearing without being summoned to tell us something  troubling and transformative, like the Ghost of Hamlet’s Father. *They are all too real.*

Symbols are the externalization of consciousness, which frees mind from somatic mortality. Gilgamesh’s rueful acknowledgement of mortality is still  with us, but Gilgamesh is not. Writing externalizes individual  experience and internalizes collective practice. Formation of a  collective mind happens in the extension of mind by symbols. Then *mind becomes bigger than and external* to the brain. Much of human history has been marked by the  externalization of somatic activity. Cooking fires start the digestive  process externally, prior to eating, allowing more complete absorption  of nutrients. The domestication of large herbivores was a substitute for our lack of an enzyme called cellulace. Humans cannot break down  cellulose, the main component of vegetation, but large herbivores have  the enzyme, so humans had the animals break grass down for them, turning grass into mobile vessels of protein and fat. Symbols externalize  portions of human cognition, turning subjective thought into objective  signs. The standardization of these signs became writing. This process  is the externalization of the individual mind, subjectivity rendered  objective.

Human life is hourglass shaped. We are  perched at the neck of an hourglass trying to select some events and  reject other events as they slide from potentiality to actuality; but we do our job imperfectly, so the flux of historical events that flows  like grains of sand into history are only partially under our individual and collective control. History is the interference pattern created by  consciousness knowing and overpowering nature. *Au natural*, the default condition of feral human beings is hunger, poverty and  fear. The Garden of Eden Myth of a long past golden age, the earthly  heaven before eternal Heaven, is not a description but a wistful dream.  It is not a nostalgic memory. Alas, once lost, there is no regaining  innocence, none of us can live in Eden. Danger, work, worry, pain;  these are the price we pay for life: nobody has it easy. Nobody rides  for free and the ride is shorter than anybody expects. The human  condition requires fortitude because nobody gets out alive. Every living thing is food for some other kind of living thing. Nature is trying to  kill us and sooner or later it will succeed. The growth of our  collective understanding of natural science has enabled us to push back  against nature with some degree of success. More people live longer and  healthier lives now than in earlier times, which allowed us to trade in  some of our old problems for new ones we like better. This is called  progress. However, as the human capacity to push back against nature  increased, so did the human ability to push back against other people.

The story of Cain and Abel has been enacted in every place and time. DNA  evidence shows how hideously routine genocide has been. What seems to  some people unprecedented genocidal slaughter as in the Nazi Holocaust,  the Ottoman extermination of the Armenians, the murderous history of  Belgium in the Congo is in fact archaic, sadly is not. There are all too many precedents from every epoch and every place, like the elimination  of the Neanderthal population that is implicit in our current DNA  remnants. If you think our archaic ancestors were bush hippies, grooving sustainably with nature, sharing and caring and hunting and gathering  in a blissful anarchy because they answered to no one and could exercise maximum liberty, you will only be able to get confirmation for this  from those of your friends who are Denisovians. Our species, at the very least, *assisted* all competing hominids groups to  globally die off. From there to the Iron Age collapse of the eastern  Mediterranean civilizations just after 1200 BC, the Athenians’  annihilation of the Melians to the Iroquois’ destruction of the Huron to the Khmer Rouge liquidation of counterrevolutionaries, the  extermination of large masses of people is not historically unusual. We  are social, hierarchical animals, like our nearest biological cousins,  chimpanzees. And like chimps, we pursue violence both within and between groups.[[5\]](applewebdata://C7A7C114-A1FB-40A7-BA8C-2361C1A0D426#_ftn5) Evidence for cannibalism in humans is found in the fossil record at least three quarters of a million years ago.[[6\]](applewebdata://C7A7C114-A1FB-40A7-BA8C-2361C1A0D426#_ftn6) In the archaic cave paintings of France and Spain, there are pictures  of extinct species of game animals such as bison and mammoth, but in  addition these paintings also contain human figures with spears buried  in their bodies.[[7\]](applewebdata://C7A7C114-A1FB-40A7-BA8C-2361C1A0D426#_ftn7)

The last 50,000 years of history that emerges from material culture and  from bones, especially those which contain recoverable DNA is reason to  worry. In this larger temporal vista, history reveals a troubling  linguistic and genetic and technological game of musical chairs.  Archaeology and paleontology reveal dozens of species that responded to  the advent of a new predator, us, by dying off almost completely shortly after people arrived. It doesn’t matter if it was Maori in New Zealand  or the Polynesians in Hawaii or Indians on the Great Plains of North  America or European mariners dining on dodo in Mauritius, it is always  the same. When people arrive in a new location, things that are easy to  kill get killed. For most of human history, local human inhabitants  outside the band were regarded as being a subset of the local fauna,  threatening at worst, but possibly edible.[[8\]](applewebdata://C7A7C114-A1FB-40A7-BA8C-2361C1A0D426#_ftn8) Other human beings were driven off or killed routinely and in some  cases, they were cannibalized. Even peaceful interaction between human  groups was potentially a source of lethal disease transfer. Eventually,  as sedentary societies developed, especially fierce foraging bands got  their first and perhaps only reason to keep captives alive, the newly  invented slave trade.[[9\]](applewebdata://C7A7C114-A1FB-40A7-BA8C-2361C1A0D426#_ftn9) In other words, in an age of genocidal war, the advent of slavery may have been a progressive change.

Everywhere on earth people manipulate nature to survive and reproduce. Ancient  peoples were not some ancient bush hippies, ardent conservationists  living in harmony with the “balance” of nature, grooving sustainably  with the animals as Enkidu did that was imagined in the wishful thinking of today’s advocates of primitivism. The ancients did whatever it took  to survive and these methods, like the burning of the landscape or  stampeding herd animals off cliffs could be extraordinarily wasteful.  From the forager’s point of view, it is always better to kill too many  prey animals than too few. No human being has ever refused to feed his  or her children out of regard for the environmental consequences. Even  when not killing animals en masse, sustained hunting pressure on animals wiped out many species that had inadequate defense to human predation.  The pattern was global. When humans first land in any new territory,  such as the Old World river valleys or Hawaii or New Zealand or the  Great Plains of North America, overhunting quickly extinguished many  species of local game animals. North America was particularly  transformed by human predation. Before human contact, the North American prairies had horses, glyptodonts (armadillos the size of ATVs), camels, several species of giant ground sloth, mammoths and other species,  which went extinct shortly after humans made their appearance on the  North American plains.

Not just animals, many of the human groups  that made the journey to the Americas were also exterminated by mobile  newcomers. We know that population Y was in the Americas at least 12kay. Around 7,000 years ago this readily identifiable South American group,  described as “population Y”, suffered a sudden sharp population  collapse. The few survivors left their homes on the coast of Peru and  escaped by crossing the Andes into the remote headwaters of the Amazon,  on the east slope lowlands. This tiny living remnant still carries the  DNA markers of population Y. The genomes of three small, very remote  tribes have DNA about 2% of which is unique in the precolumbian New  World. The DNA markers from population Y are not derived from north east Siberians, but from the same genetic pool as aboriginal Australians and inhabitants of New Guinea. They were phenotypically different from the  newcomers that killed and displaced them. The Japanese replacement  (elimination) of the Ainu, the Roman annihilation of the Etruscans and  the Carthaginians, the

Not surprisingly, the Bering Land  Bridge allowed movement in both directions. Some horses and camels  crossed from North America back into Asia and became the progenitors of  today’s Old World populations even as the animals of the American  prairie were being hunted to extinction. The original Clovis spear  point, which was made by sophisticated Neolithic hunters, was found  associated with the bones of an extinct species of mammoth. The large  Mahaffey Cache of eighty-three Clovis type spear points from 11,000 BC,  was found to contain the proteins of both extinct horses and camelids.  Both now and in the past, people were willing to push their environment  to it’s carrying capacity and beyond. Successful hunting and gathering  means an increase in the population of foraging bands. It is very close  to impossible for human groups to thrive indefinitely without upsetting  the local ecology. Sooner or later, formerly abundant resources become  scarce, successful reproduction causes human numbers to climb and  resource stress causes violence, either within or between groups. As one anthropologist aptly noted, humans will fight before they will starve.[[10\]](applewebdata://C7A7C114-A1FB-40A7-BA8C-2361C1A0D426#_ftn10) The European conquest of the New World was the ultimate resource war,  conducted by the protracted territorial expansion of multiple competing  Atlantic powers, which consumed several continents

The Hobbesian result is violence, which is far older than recorded history. The beginning of Kubrick’s 2001 was not far off. The 40,000-year-old  Shanidar Cave in Iraq contained multiple Neanderthal skeletons that died of head trauma.[[11\]](applewebdata://C7A7C114-A1FB-40A7-BA8C-2361C1A0D426#_ftn11) At Jebel Sahaba in northern Sudan on the east bank of the Nile,  sixty-eight skeletons have recently been found that were thrown together after being massacred. The 7,000BC “Kennewick Man” skeleton found by  the Columbia River in the US had a spear point in his pelvis, while  Otzi, the mummified corpse dated 3300BC found in the Italian Alps, had a defensive wound to his hand and an arrowhead in his back.

The cheery pessimism of this Big History asks not how humans could be so cruel, but rather how human life *ever* *departed* from this miserable pattern. We are the only animals who have adapted  to every ecosystem on the planet. Our civilizations make us different  from any other social animal. Only humans invent symbolism and produce a hypercomplexity both in individuals and collectives that is not just  different in degree but also in kind from aggregations of other species.[[12\]](applewebdata://C7A7C114-A1FB-40A7-BA8C-2361C1A0D426#_ftn12)  New ideas and new techniques from other disciplines have helped  historians to push backward in the line between human history and  prehistory. Natural history begins with the Big Bang. Human history  begins with the Small Bang: the stone age invention of symbolism, which  is subjectivity made objective, the “inside” rendered “outside”.  Subjectivity, the notion of a single self that is continuously  experiencing over time but also limited in time, is the *Sonderstellung*, the unique numinous valence of the human. In this respect, Descartes  and Sartre were right: consciousness is simple; it is given and cannot  be dismissed or ignored. Mind is here to stay.

One of the  great attractions of sedentary agriculture was the dramatic increase in  population that could be sustained in a single geographical area, and  this population increase made it difficult or impossible for most  foraging bands to raid successfully. For example, in Chatal Hoyuk in  Turkey, one of the earliest known agricultural settlements, thousands of farming people clustered together, which made lethal attacks by nomadic bands, which usually numbered a few dozen and almost never reached a  hundred, all but impossible. Much has been made of the drudgery and lack of dietary variety in early farming villages, but going to sleep with  some assurance that one is going to wake up again is a valuable thing,  easily underestimated by those who have never experienced such fear.  Moreover, most people have strong emotional bonds to their families, and security for children is something many parents would willingly  sacrifice for.
