---
title: Thoughts on Chinese history
date: 2022-02-02
---

In many ways, the ancient history of China is sui generis among Old World civilizations. Unlike the  Tigris-Euphrates, the Nile and the Indus, the Chinese civilization that  developed first in the Yellow River valley and later in the Yangtze  river valley emerged during the of the third millennium BC had little  early contact with the other ancient civilizations. The Neolithic  history of early China starts about 6000BC, producing petroglyphs that  have been interpreted as proto-writing. The early Yangshao (c.5000-3000  and Longshan cultures (c.3000-2000) were based on millet and rice  cultivation in decentralized villages. Bronze metallurgy was  independently developed around 3,000 BC. The later history of China is  conventionally organized around ruling dynasties. The Xia dynasty, which in mentioned in ancient Chinese sources, left no surviving records, but the Shang dynasty, centered in the Yellow River valley, lasted from  approximately 1600BC until 1046BC. The Shang was succeeded by the Zhou  dynasty (1046 to 256BC). The Zhou introduced the claim of political  legitimacy based on the “Mandate of Heaven”, which was analogous to the  religious/political claims made by rulers in Egypt and Mesopotamia.  Unlike these other civilizations, the “Heaven” that approved the Zhou  emperors was impersonal and not anthropomorphized, which is a uniquely  sophisticated idea.

The Late Zhou era was an Iron Age marked by  political instability and fragmentation. The “Spring and Autumn Annals”  describe the conflicts between numerous local military leaders between  722 and 476, which took centuries to resolve into seven major powers.  Thereafter for more than two hundred years, these powers fought  inconclusively among themselves, with shifting balances of power and  considerable destruction. Despite, and perhaps in response to this  political turmoil, the most important thinkers in Chinese tradition  lived between the Late Zhou and Era of Warring states. This intellectual flowering, called the era of the “Hundred Schools of Thought” ended in  221, with the terrifying repression of the first emperor, Qin Shih Huang Di. Confucianism was suppressed during Qin Dynasty in favor of the more authoritarian Legalism.

The very complex history of ancient  Chinese thought embraces at least as many intellectual tensions and  moves in at least as many directions as that of ancient Greece. The  proliferation of the “Hundred Schools” of thought between the seventh  and third centuries BC was driven by the political turmoil of the “Era  of Warring States” (475-221BC) and then by the abolition of feudalism  under the Qin Emperor. Chinese scholar-officials, dismissed from their  posts and in need of income, became teachers who often had the  intellectual habits and characteristics inculcated by their former  political positions. Six recognized schools of thought emerged: the  Ying/Yang school of naturalists, the Confucian literati, the followers  of Mozi (who advocated universal love), the School of Names which taught a sort of sophistic eristic, the Legalists who advocated strict laws  and draconian punishments, and the Taoists who embraced nature mysticism and pantheism. Four Books became the canonical Confucian classics, The  Analects, the Book of Mencius, The Great Learning and The Doctrine of  the Mean.

Chinese mysticism and practices of divination are found  very early, during the second millennium BC. The earliest surviving text of Chinese Archaic Physics is the I Ching, which was a handbook of  divination as well as a meditation on the patterns of change in nature.  Taoist mysticism and naturalism combined about 800 BC to form this  archaic manual of divination, the Book of Changes. Laotzi, the  traditional founder of Taoism, was generally considered the author or  compiler, but he probably collected and connected earlier folk beliefs.  In the sixth century BC. Laozi advocated a quietism, renunciation,  pantheism and harmony with nature that had deep roots in Chinese folk  cultural traditions. Laozi was traditionally described by the pious as  the teacher of Confucius (551-497BC) but this is uncertain. The Tao,  usually translated as “The Way”, has no perfectly satisfactory  translation because even in Chinese, it is on the cusp of the sayable  and the unsayable. In this the Tao is reminiscent of Parmenides “One”  and Heraclitus’ “Zeus which does and does not like being called “Zeus””. The Tao was immanent, not transcendent, and it resists direct  articulation and conceptualization. Laozi was in some sense the  personification of Tao and his teachings were indirect, obliquely  hinting at more than stating the properties of the Tao. The ancient  Chinese intellectual tradition always focused on aphorisms, parables,  paradoxes, and conceptual gestures rather than encyclopedic systematic  treatises, like those of Aristotle or Aquinas.

Most Chinese  views of history and politics shared with Hesiod a nostalgia for a lost  Golden Age which involved a search for archaic virtue. The greatest  figure in Chinese culture, Confucius (551-497BC) claimed that he was a  transmitter of ancient doctrines rather than an inventor of new ideas.  Confucius was both a political official and a philosopher. There was no  distinction between theory and practice. He emphasized tradition,  familial obligation, ritual observance, moral virtue, sincerity and love of learning. Occasionally Confucius referred to Heaven and an  afterlife, but he primarily advocated a this worldly emulation of the  virtue exemplified by the ancient sages. He taught his students the  importance of doing right thing for the right reason. Confucius taught  his followers: “Li” which involves propriety and tradition, “yi” which  is righteousness and “ren” which is duty to others and is related to  humaneness, selflessness and benevolence.[[1\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftn1)

The five Confucian virtues “kindness, sincerity, generosity, diligence and  knowledge” are, along with the four Platonic Virtues or the three  Christian Theological Virtues, among the great achievements of our  species. Confucian ideals sustained scholar-officials for generation  after generation. The great conservatism of Chinese civilization is the  product of numerous overlapping causes. The continental sized realm of  China was a society well suited to rule by an Emperor and administered  by mandarins. Every ancient civilization treated “innovation” as an  accusation, an evil, which was perfectly rational since most attempts in most places and times to improve on traditional, tried and true  practices were harmful failures. Confucius’ reputation for conservatism  and traditionalism was well deserved. Today, eighty-three generations,  which is currently more than two million people, trace their genealogy  back to Confucius. They are found not only in China but also in Chinese  diasporas worldwide.

The Era of Warring States was period of intellectual ferment and introspection despite the internecine  political conflicts. Mozi (470-391BC) was the idiosyncratic founder of  an optimistic school of moral naturalism, Mohism, which advocated the  idea of disinterested benevolence and meritocracy. His followers  contributed important advances in mathematics, formal logic (especially  paradoxes) and engineering before being absorbed into rival schools.  Mozi criticized both Confucianism and Taoism. His “all embracing love”  was a universal agape which went beyond the quietism of the Taoists and  the ritual formality and focus on family obligations of Confucius. Mozi  advocated austerity and self-discipline along with compassion, but his  school was eventually absorbed into the syncretism of Chinese  intellectual life. Mencius, the fourth century BC interpreter of  Confucius owed much to Mozi as well. Mencius believed in the innate  moral sense of people and he saw spontaneous compassion in human nature. He was an advocate of “jen” a “human heartedness” that would force each person to enlarge the self beyond the ego and “extend himself to  include others”[[2\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftn2) Mencius was unusual in Chinese tradition in that he claimed there existed a popular right to rebellion against an evil ruler.

The poetic Zhuang Zhu elaborated Taoism into a kind of quietism with clever wordplay in the fourth century BC. Like Socrates, he combined a great  playfulness with profound seriousness that was in the West called *hilaritatis causa*. Zhuang Zhu satirized Confucians and Mohists. His witty epigrams and his stunning parables gestured toward an aloof, apolitical individualism.  He was one of the very few true mavericks in the very conservative  Chinese intellectual milieu. He refused the offer of high political  position with a distain worthy of Diogenes or Epicurus, slyly preferring the independence and solitude of a hermit to the attractions of power.  His elegant parables and biting criticism of the opportunism of the  intellectuals and political functionaries are among the most instructive and valuable in Chinese or any other intellectual history.

Chinese Ancient Physics was separated spatially from the other ancient river  valley civilizations, and early Chinese civilization was less influenced by outside contributions than most. In China, most early scientific  focus was on processes rather than things, verbs rather than nouns.[[3\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftn3) This may, in part have been fostered by the immense differences between the Indo-European and Chinese languages, but it was also the  consequence of very different social and political conditions as well.  Chinese thought about nature posited the existence of “chi”, which is  sometimes described as “energy”, but in fact is not perfectly  translatable into English. It was used for things that were “perceptible but intangible”.[[4\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftn4) This term is still used in some of the traditional Chinese martial arts and in traditional Chinese medicine. Ancient Physics, nonmythical and  based on careful observation, was developed independently in Greece and  China. Both cultural traditions were investigating the same natural  phenomena, but China focused on transformations, Greece on entities.  Where the Greeks focused on ice, the Chinese examined freezing, where  the Greeks focused on steam, the Chinese examined boiling.

Daoism was also associated very early with Zhou Yan (305-240 BC) and the  school of naturalists, who made the first halting transitions to Ancient Physics. Zou Yan was a polymath who made connections between the  dynamism of ying/yang and the nonmythological materialism of the “Five  Phases”, which may have emerged from the tradition of Taoist alchemy.  The Ying/Yang School emphasized the dynamic opposition and a flux of  self-negation. This started out as various kinds of occult lore  pertaining to astrology, divination and numerology.[[5\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftn5) He synthesized ancient traditions concerning matter and energy to form  an independent version of Ancient Physics. Zou Yan speculated about  energy, “chi” manifested in processes of transformation and  juxtaposition as the interaction of opposites yin (soft, dark, wet,  cold, female, negative) and yang (hard, hot, light, dry, male,  positive). In this he was comparable to the Greek Empedocles, with his  account of energy and change as the opposition between love and strife.  Zou Yan connected his ideas about dynamism and change to a five-part  account of matter that might better be described as “phases” of matter  rather than “elements”. He posited the existence of air, fire and water  plus two kinds of solid, organic (wood) and inorganic (earth). These  phases were transient and there was no unchangeable “atomic” substrate  as posited in Greece or India. Tsou Yen’s five phases were only  partially analogous to the four elements (earth, air, fire and water)  posited by Empedocles.

Zou Yan’s five “phases” were locked  in a predictable, temporal flux that danced to the choreography of  nature: a cyclical Tao of time. In every year, winter was the time of  water. In early spring, water yielded to wood, which yielded to the fire of midsummer. Earth then dominated the late summer, which was  supplanted when iron dominated the fall. The rhythms of nature were a  predictable cycle of transformations and matter was not static but  sequentially modified by yin, which dominated winter, and yang, which  dominated summer. This transformative cycle repeated endlessly, an  affirmation of the ancient conception of time as cyclical. Tsou Yen’s  doctrines applied to space as well as time. The five phases corresponded to the cardinal directions (water/north, fire/south, iron/west,  wood/east and earth/center). He claimed that China was one of nine  continents, not the only place “under heaven”. The five phases were also associated with characteristic colors, tastes, heavenly bodies, and  symbolic animals. Zhou Yan also developed a naturalistic philosophy of  history, which linked cyclical time from the beginning of the world and  later political revolutions and transformations to the cyclical passing  of the Five Phases.

The development of nonmythological, Ancient  Physics understandings of nature in ancient China contain many  instructive contrasts with early Greek science. Ancient Chinese sciences were only partly homologous with presocratic physics in Greece. In  China, the institutional context, the relations between students and  teachers, the habits of thought and the politics of knowledge all  combined to encourage different emphases, such as a preference for  scholarly consensus over radical discontinuities. Every inquiry is  inevitably theory laden and not all terms are equally translatable, but  it does not follow that different accounts of nature are incommensurable or unreal, only that comparisons must be sensitive to context and  suitably nuanced.

Because of its uniquely long history, Chinese  traditions placed great demands on ancient religious ritual. These  rituals had to be performed at the exact point of the annual cycle so to maintain the mandate of heaven, and celestial events like meteors,  comets and eclipses were dangerous portents, carrying cautionary  messages to the government. There was a unique bifurcation in Chinese  “sciences”. The terrestrial sciences moved from archaic to ancient, with extraordinary, largely autarchic, achievements in medicine and  engineering while celestial sciences, like astronomy/astrology persisted as spooky archaic traditions. It was the 16th century Jesuit Matteo  Ricci who brought modern astronomy to China. When he arrived, the  Chinese officials in charge of the calendar still had archaic physics in which the earth was assumed to be flat, and the universe, of course,  geocentric. Getting the calendar right was a matter of state concern; a  competition was arranged predicting eclipses and the new heliocentric  physics proved far more accurate.

Every society needs to  modify nature to serve its purposes, and the ability to predict and  control nature is required for survival itself. In China, there was no  single term for “nature”, what the Greeks called “physis”. It might be  more accurate to refer to ancient Chinese “sciences” rather than  “science”.[[6\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftn6) China achieved political unification very early in its history and the  sociopolitical influences on Chinese sciences were very different than  those in Greece. The Chinese imperial government was *the* major patron on scientific studies and this has no Greek counterpart.  Like its earlier river valley civilization predecessors, the dynasties  which ruled imperial China had a vested state interest in the  investigation and prediction of nature, because astronomy and astrology  were not completely disentangled, the accuracy of the calendar had both  practical and ritual importance, and eclipses or earthquakes were  portentous matters of political concern.[[7\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftn7) Various terrestrial sciences in China, moved from archaic to ancient,  but the celestial sciences in China remained archaic mostly for  political reasons.[[8\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftn8) Popular beliefs about astrology and portents had to be considered  because they were connected to the legitimacy of the ruler. The sciences in China were bureaucratized, standardized and only alchemy lacked  governmental subsidy. As scientific traditions ossified into a single  set of doctrines, the conservative influence of imperial patronage  reinforced traditional orthodoxy, and the consensus of sagely beliefs  about nature was rarely questioned. It is not accidental that the  Chinese term for “pathogen” was the same one used for “heterodoxy”.[[9\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftn9)

The last great doctrine that emerged from the “Hundred Schools” was  Legalism. It was first formulated first as a kind of Hobbesian  Realpolitik by Hsun Tzu (310-235BC). He articulated a kind of realist  totalitarianism focused on power and force, demanding severity and fear  from a ruler. These ideas were later developed by Han Fei Zi  (280-233BC), an aristocrat with a Confucian education. Han Fei Zi had an almost Augustinian view of human depravity, inverting the doctrine of  Mozi, he insisted that human nature was intrinsically evil. Only  draconian laws scrupulously enforced could prevent the evil intrinsic to human nature from erupting into violence and chaos. The Era of Warring  States was a calamitous centuries long stalemate of mutual destruction  which demanded a remedy. Driven by a Hobbesian fear of death and running scared, Legalism employed strict laws and draconian punishments to  maintain order. Surprisingly derived from earlier Mohist emphases on  disinterested benevolence and compassion, Legalism was associated with  meritocratic officialdom and enlightened despotism as the proper means  of restraining disorder. Unlike most of the thinkers in the Chinese  intellectual tradition, the Legalists had no sentimental attachment to a mythical Golden Age. Like their fellow realist, Thucydides, the  Legalists saw history as a progress, not a regress, and they both  emphasized how fragile political order is and acknowledged that violence and politics can never be fully disentangled. The conservatism of China is in many ways comparable to Egypt. Both were ancient political  traditions located at the end of long trade routes which were  understandably biased in favor of the familiar and traditional and  against unrule.

Qin Shih Huang Di (259-210BC), the first  emperor of China, ended the Era of Warring States and unified China,  crushing his opponents with extraordinary ruthlessness and unrestrained  ambition. The official doctrine of the Qin state was Legalism. Qin was  sufficiently important in Chinese history to have the country named  after him. He ruled by tyranny and terror, violence and death. The first emperor was an avatar of what the Greeks called hybris; he was  represented by Chinese historians as vindictive, arrogant, paranoid and  megalomaniacal, prone to gestures of extravagant cruelty. In the Records of the Grand Historian, Sima Qian relates a traditional account of the  first emperor’s ferocity.[[10\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftn10) Distrustful of intellectuals, he was legendary for ending the “Hundred  Schools of Thought”, ordering a mass burning of books across his realm  then burying 460 scholars alive in an extravagant show of force. Modern  historians regard this account of his atrocities as factually dubious,  but it is indicative of the extreme rapacity attributed to the first  emperor that was regarded as believable by the consensus of Chinese  historical tradition. Qin Shih Hwang Ti, like other great conquerors,  such as Tamburlane, Napoleon, Shaka or Hannibal found terror useful and  deployed it as necessary and sometimes far beyond what was necessary,  threatening in very convincing fashion to exterminate entire  populations. 

Unbounded ego leaves no room for the  subjectivity of others. It can only see people as objects, purely as a  means, to their own purposes and desires. They are disposable and  replaceable, there is no love not directed toward another subjectivity.  Once after a defeat that cost him thousands of casualties, Napoleon  shrugged and said that Paris replaced his loss in one night’s amours.  The great conquerors like Qin Shih Huang Di, Alexander, Genghis also had maximal ego, but their dynasties proved ephemeral. Unbounded ego in Qin Shih Hwang Di or Alexander the Great or Genghis Khan or Napoleon  seduced with the nearly irresistible illusion of being in control of  destiny. This Great Man heroism is a poetic idealization as Chuang Tzu  knew. Abraham Lincoln, whose ego was tragically human, is a useful tonic to the megalomaniac conquerors. He candidly insisted that the events of the Civil War had made him far more than he made events. He was one of  the greatest of the great modern conquerors and his Second Inaugural  Address, anticipating the reconciliation necessary to postwar peace, is  one of the great speeches of modernity. “With malice toward none, with  charity to all, with firmness in the right as God gives us to see the  right…” he proposes to reunite the country in a minimally punitive way.  Without posturing or pretense, this speech was one of the great  exercises in magnanimity by a conqueror anyplace or anywhere, and one of the great documents in the history of politics.

Minimal ego sets  the opposite boundary to human life Jesus, Buddha, Chuang Tzu seek  perfection in the nucleus of the psyche, with minimalist selves, free of desire and distraction. They were the great avatars of peace,  benevolence and quietude. All three wished to conquer the inner world of subjectivity, with little interest in externalities like family, wealth or politics. Minimal ego allows maximal space for compassion, which  moves even a hermit like Chuang Tzu. Enlightenment requires even  dispassionate Buddha to compassionately offer Enlightenment to those in  darkness. Jesus’ kingdom is not of this world, yet He weeps for  Jerusalem. These minima and maxima of the ego set the boundaries for  self and others. The aggregation of these selves contributes to society a moral ecology. Pessimism and optimism about human nature determine the  consensus about risks worth taking to improve social life, revolutionary or evolutionary. Political order and change are not separable from  ethics and psychology.

Legalism in China argued very early for an  absolute state on the basis of a pessimistic theory of human nature like that proposed by Hobbes many centuries later. In practice, maximal  government catalyzes maximum ego in the rulers. The most important  single figure in Chinese history was famous for his draconian  punishments, and he enforced law as harshly as the Legalists  recommended. The first Emperor, Qin Shi Huang Ti ended the catastrophic  Era of Warring States and unified China. He was feared by all and hated  by some. No one doubted he was a despotic megalomaniac. He survived  multiple assassination attempts. Living at a time when the abolition of  human finitude by magically obtaining immortality was viewed as an  intellectually serious, practical possibility, the First Emperor went to extraordinary lengths to obtain the fabled “Elixir of Eternal Life”  described in Daoist alchemy. Completely cut off from the rest of  humanity, his grandiosity seriously and literally aspired to divine  status and this entailed a lofty disregard for the ephemeral lives of  his merely human subjects. He sent scouts in every direction to find the Elixir or sages who knew the recipe. Because returning without the  sought for prescription for immortality incurred the First Emperor’s  displeasure, and this often meant a summary encounter with the scout’s  own mortality, many of those sent searching kept going and never  returned. Among those that did, the ones who survived actually presented him with various recipes for the elixir. These recipes included an  array of exotic ingredients, including liquid mercury. Mercury is toxic  and causes brain damage. Ironically, it was Qin Shih Huang Di’s  desperate search for immortality that drove him mad and eventually  killed him. Aida is a wonderful piece, but the story of Chin Shih Hwang  Ti might have been the libretto for an even greater Verdi opera. It  would necessarily be outside the human scale, like the Requiem, and Like Chin Shih Huang Ti himself.

The first Emperor thought long term  and he tried to make himself comfortable as he was planning to stay. He  focused on security and standardization. He began the construction of  the Great Wall, connecting various smaller walls and fortifications into the largest sustained public works project in human history, which took centuries to complete and extended for thousands of miles. He also  ordered the construction of transportation infrastructure. Logistics  were crucial for China’s long term prosperity. The mobility of his  military required an extensive system of roads and canals, and since he  set China to work. The Lingqu Canal was an immense undertaking, but  water transport was by far the quickest and most efficient in the  ancient world. Qin Shi Huang Di also busied himself standardizing  weights and measures, the size of cart axles (to facilitate road  traffic), coinage and the written Chinese language.

**PIX OF TOMB**

Trusting nothing and no one, Qin Shi Huang Di hedged his bets, constructing a  mausoleum for himself so vast as to be completely outside the human  scale, supplied with a massive 6,000 man terracotta army equipped with  40,000 bronze weapons. This tomb, which is the size of a small city,  required immense manpower, traditionally numbered in the hundreds of  thousands, to construct, and after it was completed he ordered the  construction workers massacred, so the tomb’s secrets would forever  remain hidden. This grandiose tomb, which would have seemed excessive to Ozymandias, has been located by Chinese archaeologists and has not yet  fully excavated. Chin Shih Huang Di was sui generis, the Qin dynasty  ended with him. Perhaps the unification of China required an utterly  ruthless megalomaniac who ruled with blood and iron, but one wonders if  the Qin emperor’s paranoia and madness led him to use more violence and  terror than was necessary. Even for those not sociopathic the ghastly  logic of terror is a bargain with the Devil, because once terror is  embraced for whatever political end, then forever after the safety and  wisdom of the terrorist demands that in cases with any doubt they employ too much, rather than too little, terror. So terror intrinsically  threatens to spiral out of control like a forest fire.

The  Han dynasty (206BC-220AD) succeeded after a period of conflict and  fragmentation. The Han centuries were contemporaneous with Rome at its  peak and these two regional civilizations were nebulously aware of each  other and conducted long distance trade. Both Rome and Han China were  intellectually dynamic and highly accomplished in large-scale practical  projects that required sophisticated engineering. The scholar Dong  Zhongshu (179-104BC) created a successful synthesis of Confucian ethics  and the physical theories of the School of Naturalists. He established  Confucian orthodoxy in civil service exams, requiring a focus on classic texts. He connected the movements of the seasons with the cycles of  government and he developed a cyclical philosophy of history. When Zou  Yan’s account of nature was institutionalized it became particularly  important in the development of traditional Chinese medicine.[[11\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftn11) The extremely influential Han emperor Wudi (reigned 141-87BC) made  Confucianism the official ideology of the Han state. Wudi required  Confucian works in civil service exams starting in 140BC. The Chinese  canon of classics that emerged during the Han dynasty became ossified  into a kind of traditional scholasticism that lasted for centuries. It  was during the Han dynasty that Confucius was promoted from a sage to a  god. Because the Confucian intellectual tradition straddles the boundary between what Westerners usually refer to as two distinct categories,  religion and philosophy, the sacred and the secular, there is no chance  of shoehorning Confucianism into one procrustean Western category or the other. It was a belief system that syncretized with Taoist, Buddhist  and other traditions and reinforced the connection between politics and  ethics. It sustained a society of millions for a period of centuries and molded generation after generation of scholar-officials in what was  arguably the most successful political regime in world history.

During the Han dynasty the most important advance in practice was the Chinese  invention of paper, which was less laborious to produce and thus far  cheaper than the alternative writing materials. Chinese astronomy was  associated with ongoing concerns about the calendar, because exact dates were politically critical for the Confucians. In the centralized  circumstances of China, the state was always more concerned with  investigation than the politically decentralized Greeks. Harmony  between Heaven Earth and Mankind as well as political stability was  thought to be contingent on the exact performance of traditional  rituals. As in Archaic Physics, comets, earthquakes, and other unusual  natural phenomena were regarded both as portents and as the consequences of failed rituals.

The Ancient Science of Zhou Yan and the School of Naturalists was most influential in practical endeavors like  metallurgy, agriculture, harmonics and engineering. Mathematics also  flourished during the Han dynasty, but unlike Greece, there was little  interest in axiomization. The Theorem of Pythagoras was proven, square  and cube roots and approximations of pi were developed, and the first  known use of negative numbers was introduced. The Han dynasty was marked by prosperity, commerce grew and the most famous trade route of the Old World, the Silk Road, connected China with East Africa, the  Mediterranean and all the civilizations in between.

Buddhism in  China was disseminated beyond its home in India during the second half  of the Han dynasty (206BC-220AD), probably overland through the Silk  Road trade routes. The efforts of Ashoka in extending Buddhism helped it expand from Japan to the Egypt to Tibet and Mongolia. Perhaps the most  important cultural change in ancient China was the introduction of  Buddhism from India in the first century AD, probably by missionaries  that proselytized in central Asia. Translations of Buddhist sutras were  made, and the bilingualism it required facilitated further cultural  connections between China and India. Despite the fact that Hinduism all  but extinguished Buddhism in India, it flourished when adapted to China. By the second century AD, Buddha was described as a student of Laozi.  Syncretism between Buddhism and Daoism, on the basis of common  traditions of asceticism and quietism and mysticism, made the new  doctrines more widely accessible to the Chinese. Buddhist texts  proliferated, even as Buddhism disappeared in India and the world’s  first known printed book is a Diamond Sutra dated to 868. Syncretism,  which generally has characterized the religious traditions of China,  created a partial overlap between the imported Buddhist, Taoist, and the official Chinese state doctrine of Confucianism.

The history of  China was marked by greater stability and continuity than most ancient  states because the construction of the Great Wall kept the steppe nomads that plagued Mesopotamia at bay for centuries. Internally, the  administration of government was handled consistently and capably. The  result was a gradual demographic and spatial expansion. Though marked by intermittent setbacks due to flooding or epidemic disease, Chinese  population and wealth trended upward. Chinese civilization achieved  important technological achievements, sometimes called the “Four  Inventions”. Papermaking was independently developed in China during the Han dynasty and became widely used for writing documents in the third  century AD. The Egyptians anticipated Chinese papermaking with their  development of papyrus much earlier, but the Chinese did not derive  their papermaking from Egyptian sources. Paper, combined with the  Chinese invention of printing, was a revolution in the technology of  information storage and retrieval, and knowledge is power. Taoist  alchemists stumbled upon gunpowder in the ninth century AD, and it was  fully weaponized by 1000. The magnetic compass was developed earlier  than anyplace else during the Han dynasty, but it was initially used in  divination rather than navigation. Evidence for the use of the mariners  compass dates back to the eleventh century AD, and this important new  invention must have greatly facilitated the seven expeditions of Zheng  He between 1405 and 1433. These voyages ranged as far as East Africa,  and there exists a contemporary picture drawn of a giraffe that Zheng He brought back with him which contains Chinese characters no doubt  expressing amazement at such a curiosity. In the first millennium AD,  all the most important technological breakthroughs came from China, the  practical dividend paid by Ancient Physics when it was combined with  political stability and capable administration.

Unlike Greece,  which was geographically divided into city-states, China was from very  early in its history a continental sized domain. This imposed intrinsic  constraints on the practical possibilities of political order, favoring  strong central authority and well-organized, highly competent  administration. All schools of thought in ancient China, Taoist,  Confucian or Legalist, supported the idea of a sage emperor supported by highly trained, well-educated scholar/officials. This recognition of  the need to avoid the disjunction of knowledge and power was the central idea of Plato’s Republic and it was put into practice in China. The  sheer size of the area being administered, taxed and organized meant  that China needed an extensive and highly capable bureaucracy. The  Chinese did not experiment with different political forms, finding  “imperial meritocracy” answered their needs. The stakes were very high  and there was a consensus that only an emperor who enjoyed the Mandate  of Heaven could create stability, prosperity and good order. Effective  rule demanded able administrators. The most important sage in the  Chinese tradition, Confucius, was deeply committed to tradition and at  the same time was the great exemplar of the morally and intellectually  superior scholar/official. The Chinese commitment to “virtue” in  government bureaucrats, defined as knowledge of, and facility with, the  classic texts of the Confucian tradition, dates back at least as early  as the Han dynasty. Chinese officials were not chosen on the basis of  heredity but on character and intellect, and the administration of the  mandarins was one of the most successful political regimes in world  history. It produced a steady supply of capable men to administer the  largest single civilization on the planet.

Starting in 605 AD, the standardized imperial examinations, written, administered and graded by mandarins, were offered every few years to any young man who had some  degree of education and wished to try his mettle. Although some degree  of corruption inevitably crept into the system, as is true of any  bureaucracy, the examination system was exceptionally effective in  advancing test takers on the basis of effort, learning, character and  demonstrated intellectual achievement. As a result, the mandarinate  became a self-perpetuating bureaucracy, indispensible to effective  government in China. Even the later Mongol “conquest dynasties” of the  Yuan (1271-1386) and Ming (1368-1644) could not function without this  class of scholar/officials. The last mandarin examinations were given in 1905. One of the reasons that the Chinese Communist Party in the  twenty-first century has successfully outlasted Communism is because  standards for admission to the CCP have significant similarities to the  extraordinarily successful mandarin tradition.

The central  concern of Greek political theory, the polis, was irrelevant in China.  Instead, Chinese political theory focused on the family as the natural  model for governance. In Mandarin Chinese there are approximately one  hundred different terms indicating kinship and the vast majority of  these have no synonymous English translation. The term for one’s  paternal *younger* great uncle is different from the term for one’s paternal *older* great uncle, which of course involves different terms for the older and younger *maternal*great uncles, plus separate terms for all of their wives.

Among the Greeks the demands of family, with a few exceptions like Antigone,  are less important than the bonds of friendship, as was the case with  Achilles and Patroclus or Aristotle in the Nicomachean Ethics. As in  China, family life is the most important element in the political theory that connects all three monotheisms.

[[1\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftnref1) Bryan W Van Norden, *An Introduction to Chinese Philosophy*, Indianapolis, Hackett, 2011

[[2\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftnref2) Fung, *History of Chinese Philosophy*, 69.

[[3\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftnref3) GER Lloyd, *Ancient Worlds, Modern Reflections*, 78.

[[4\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftnref4) Lloyd and Sivin, *The Way and the Word*, 196.

[[5\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftnref5) Fung, *History of Chinese Philosophy,* 129.

[[6\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftnref6) Lloyd and Sivin, *The Way and the Word*, 227

[[7\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftnref7) Lloyd and Sivin*, The Way and the World*, 180.

[[8\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftnref8) Rovelli, *Anaximander*,

[[9\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftnref9) Lloyd and Sivin, *The Way and the Word*, 246

[[10\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftnref10) Sima Qian

[[11\]](applewebdata://F01FC755-BEF7-427C-8BA2-1EF041DC19DD#_ftnref11) Lloyd and Sivin, *The Way and the Word,* 73, 80.w
